the mysterious island
jules verne
part 1 - -dropped from the clouds
chapter 1
" are we rising again ? "
" no . on the contrary . " " are we descending ? "
" worse than that , captain ! we are falling ! "
" for heaven 's sake heave out the ballast ! "
" i hear a noise like the dashing of waves . the sea is below the car !
it can not be more than 500 feet from us ! " " overboard with every weight ! ... everything ! "
such were the loud and startling words which resounded through the air , above the vast watery desert of the pacific , about four o'clock in the evening of the 23rd of march , 1865 .
the tempest raged without intermission from the 18th to the 26th of march .
its ravages were terrible in america , europe , and asia , covering a distance of eighteen hundred miles , and extending obliquely to the equator from the thirty - fifth north parallel to the fortieth south parallel .
but while so many catastrophes were taking place on land and at sea , a drama not less exciting was being enacted in the agitated air .
in fact , a balloon , as a ball might be carried on the summit of a waterspout , had been taken into the circling movement of a column of air and had traversed space at the rate of ninety miles an hour , turning round and round as if seized by some aerial maelstrom .
beneath the lower point of the balloon swung a car , containing five passengers , scarcely visible in the midst of the thick vapor mingled with spray which hung over the surface of the ocean .
whence , it may be asked , had come that plaything of the tempest ?
from what part of the world did it rise ?
it surely could not have started during the storm . but the storm had raged five days already , and the first symptoms were manifested on the 18th .
it can not be doubted that the balloon came from a great distance , for it could not have traveled less than two thousand miles in twenty - four hours . at any rate the passengers , destitute of all marks for their guidance , could not have possessed the means of reckoning the route traversed since their departure .
it was a remarkable fact that , although in the very midst of the furious tempest , they did not suffer from it .
they were thrown about and whirled round and round without feeling the rotation in the slightest degree , or being sensible that they were removed from a horizontal position .
their eyes could not pierce through the thick mist which had gathered beneath the car .
dark vapor was all around them .
such was the density of the atmosphere that they could not be certain whether it was day or night .
no reflection of light , no sound from inhabited land , no roaring of the ocean could have reached them , through the obscurity , while suspended in those elevated zones .
their rapid descent alone had informed them of the dangers which they ran from the waves .
however , the balloon , lightened of heavy articles , such as ammunition , arms , and provisions , had risen into the higher layers of the atmosphere , to a height of 4,500 feet .
the voyagers , after having discovered that the sea extended beneath them , and thinking the dangers above less dreadful than those below , did not hesitate to throw overboard even their most useful articles , while they endeavored to lose no more of that fluid , the life of their enterprise , which sustained them above the abyss .
the night passed in the midst of alarms which would have been death to less energetic souls .
again the day appeared and with it the tempest began to moderate .
from the beginning of that day , the 24th of march , it showed symptoms of abating .
at dawn , some of the lighter clouds had risen into the more lofty regions of the air .
it was still what sailors call " a close - reefed topsail breeze , " but the commotion in the elements had none the less considerably diminished .
towards eleven o'clock , the lower region of the air was sensibly clearer .
the atmosphere threw off that chilly dampness which is felt after the passage of a great meteor .
but at the same time , it was also evident that the balloon was again slowly descending with a regular movement .
it appeared as if it were , little by little , collapsing , and that its case was lengthening and extending , passing from a spherical to an oval form .
towards midday the balloon was hovering above the sea at a height of only 2,000 feet . it contained 50,000 cubic feet of gas , and , thanks to its capacity , it could maintain itself a long time in the air , although it should reach a great altitude or might be thrown into a horizontal position .
perceiving their danger , the passengers cast away the last articles which still weighed down the car , the few provisions they had kept , everything , even to their pocket - knives , and one of them , having hoisted himself on to the circles which united the cords of the net , tried to secure more firmly the lower point of the balloon .
it was , however , evident to the voyagers that the gas was failing , and that the balloon could no longer be sustained in the higher regions .
they must infallibly perish ! there was not a continent , nor even an island , visible beneath them .
the watery expanse did not present a single speck of land , not a solid surface upon which their anchor could hold .
it was the open sea , whose waves were still dashing with tremendous violence !
it was the ocean , without any visible limits , even for those whose gaze , from their commanding position , extended over a radius of forty miles .
the vast liquid plain , lashed without mercy by the storm , appeared as if covered with herds of furious chargers , whose white and disheveled crests were streaming in the wind .
no land was in sight , not a solitary ship could be seen .
it was necessary at any cost to arrest their downward course , and to prevent the balloon from being engulfed in the waves . the voyagers directed all their energies to this urgent work .
but , notwithstanding their efforts , the balloon still fell , and at the same time shifted with the greatest rapidity , following the direction of the wind , that is to say , from the northeast to the southwest .
frightful indeed was the situation of these unfortunate men .
they were evidently no longer masters of the machine .
all their attempts were useless .
the case of the balloon collapsed more and more .
their descent was visibly accelerated , and soon after midday the car hung within 600 feet of the ocean .
it was impossible to prevent the escape of gas , which rushed through a large rent in the silk .
by lightening the car of all the articles which it contained , the passengers had been able to prolong their suspension in the air for a few hours .
but the inevitable catastrophe could only be retarded , and if land did not appear before night , voyagers , car , and balloon must to a certainty vanish beneath the waves .
they now resorted to the only remaining expedient .
they were truly dauntless men , who knew how to look death in the face .
not a single murmur escaped from their lips .
they were determined to struggle to the last minute , to do anything to retard their fall .
the car was only a sort of willow basket , unable to float , and there was not the slightest possibility of maintaining it on the surface of the sea .
two more hours passed and the balloon was scarcely 400 feet above the water .
at that moment a loud voice , the voice of a man whose heart was inaccessible to fear , was heard .
to this voice responded others not less determined .
" no , here are still 2,000 dollars in gold . "
a heavy bag immediately plunged into the sea .
" does the balloon rise ? " " a little , but it will not be long before it falls again . "
" what still remains to be thrown out ? "
" nothing . "
" yes ! the car ! " " let us catch hold of the net , and into the sea with the car . "
this was , in fact , the last and only mode of lightening the balloon .
the ropes which held the car were cut , and the balloon , after its fall , mounted 2,000 feet .
the five voyagers had hoisted themselves into the net , and clung to the meshes , gazing at the abyss .
the delicate sensibility of balloons is well known .
it is sufficient to throw out the lightest article to produce a difference in its vertical position .
the apparatus in the air is like a balance of mathematical precision .
it can be thus easily understood that when it is lightened of any considerable weight its movement will be impetuous and sudden .
so it happened on this occasion .
but after being suspended for an instant aloft , the balloon began to redescend , the gas escaping by the rent which it was impossible to repair .
the men had done all that men could do .
no human efforts could save them now .
they must trust to the mercy of him who rules the elements .
at four o'clock the balloon was only 500 feet above the surface of the water .
a loud barking was heard .
a dog accompanied the voyagers , and was held pressed close to his master in the meshes of the net .
" top has seen something , " cried one of the men .
then immediately a loud voice shouted,--
" land ! land ! "
the balloon , which the wind still drove towards the southwest , had since daybreak gone a considerable distance , which might be reckoned by hundreds of miles , and a tolerably high land had , in fact , appeared in that direction .
but this land was still thirty miles off .
it would not take less than an hour to get to it , and then there was the chance of falling to leeward .
an hour !
might not the balloon before that be emptied of all the fluid it yet retained ?
such was the terrible question !
the voyagers could distinctly see that solid spot which they must reach at any cost .
but they must reach this land , whether inhabited or desolate , whether hospitable or not .
half an hour later the land was not more than a mile off , but the balloon , exhausted , flabby , hanging in great folds , had gas in its upper part alone .
the voyagers , clinging to the net , were still too heavy for it , and soon , half plunged into the sea , they were beaten by the furious waves .
the balloon - case bulged out again , and the wind , taking it , drove it along like a vessel .
might it not possibly thus reach the land ?
but , when only two fathoms off , terrible cries resounded from four pairs of lungs at once .
at last , two minutes later , it reproached obliquely , and finally fell on a sandy beach , out of the reach of the waves .
the voyagers , aiding each other , managed to disengage themselves from the meshes of the net .
the balloon , relieved of their weight , was taken by the wind , and like a wounded bird which revives for an instant , disappeared into space .
but the car had contained five passengers , with a dog , and the balloon only left four on the shore .
scarcely had the four castaways set foot on firm ground , than they all , thinking of the absent one , simultaneously exclaimed , " perhaps he will try to swim to land !
let us save him ! let us save him ! "
a hundred times they had almost perished !
a hundred times had they almost fallen from their torn balloon into the depths of the ocean .
but heaven had reserved them for a strange destiny , and after having , on the 20th of march , escaped from richmond , besieged by the troops of general ulysses grant , they found themselves seven thousand miles from the capital of virginia , which was the principal stronghold of the south , during the terrible war of secession .
their aerial voyage had lasted five days .
he was a native of massachusetts , a first - class engineer , to whom the government had confided , during the war , the direction of the railways , which were so important at that time .
he had one - of those finely - developed heads which appear made to be struck on a medal , piercing eyes , a serious mouth , the physiognomy of a clever man of the military school .
he was one of those engineers who began by handling the hammer and pickaxe , like generals who first act as common soldiers .
besides mental power , he also possessed great manual dexterity .
his muscles exhibited remarkable proofs of tenacity .
a man of action as well as a man of thought , all he did was without effort to one of his vigorous and sanguine temperament .
he might have taken for his motto that of william of orange in the 17th century : " i can undertake and persevere even without hope of success . "
cyrus harding was courage personified .
he had been in all the battles of that war .
and hundreds of times captain harding had almost been among those who were not counted by the terrible grant ; but in these combats where he never spared himself , fortune favored him till the moment when he was wounded and taken prisoner on the field of battle near richmond .
at the same time and on the same day another important personage fell into the hands of the southerners .
this was no other than gideon spilett , a reporter for the new york herald , who had been ordered to follow the changes of the war in the midst of the northern armies .
gideon spilett was one of that race of indomitable english or american chroniclers , like stanley and others , who stop at nothing to obtain exact information , and transmit it to their journal in the shortest possible time .
the newspapers of the union , such as the new york herald , are genuine powers , and their reporters are men to be reckoned with .
gideon spilett ranked among the first of those reporters : a man of great merit , energetic , prompt and ready for anything , full of ideas , having traveled over the whole world , soldier and artist , enthusiastic in council , resolute in action , caring neither for trouble , fatigue , nor danger , when in pursuit of information , for himself first , and then for his journal , a perfect treasury of knowledge on all sorts of curious subjects , of the unpublished , of the unknown , and of the impossible . he was one of those intrepid observers who write under fire , " reporting " among bullets , and to whom every danger is welcome .
he also had been in all the battles , in the first rank , revolver in one hand , note - book in the other ; grape - shot never made his pencil tremble .
he did not fatigue the wires with incessant telegrams , like those who speak when they have nothing to say , but each of his notes , short , decisive , and clear , threw light on some important point .
besides , he was not wanting in humor .
it was he who , after the affair of the black river , determined at any cost to keep his place at the wicket of the telegraph office , and after having announced to his journal the result of the battle , telegraphed for two hours the first chapters of the bible .
it cost the new york herald two thousand dollars , but the new york herald published the first intelligence .
gideon spilett was tall .
light whiskers bordering on red surrounded his face .
well built , he was inured to all climates , like a bar of steel hardened in cold water .
for ten years gideon spilett had been the reporter of the new york herald , which he enriched by his letters and drawings , for he was as skilful in the use of the pencil as of the pen .
when he was captured , he was in the act of making a description and sketch of the battle .
the last words in his note - book were these : " a southern rifleman has just taken aim at me , but-- " the southerner notwithstanding missed gideon spilett , who , with his usual fortune , came out of this affair without a scratch .
cyrus harding and gideon spilett , who did not know each other except by reputation , had both been carried to richmond .
the engineer 's wounds rapidly healed , and it was during his convalescence that he made acquaintance with the reporter .
the two men then learned to appreciate each other .
soon their common aim had but one object , that of escaping , rejoining grant 's army , and fighting together in the ranks of the federals .
the once slave , though free , would not leave his master .
he would have died for him .
he was a man of about thirty , vigorous , active , clever , intelligent , gentle , and calm , sometimes naive , always merry , obliging , and honest .
his name was nebuchadnezzar , but he only answered to the familiar abbreviation of neb .
when neb heard that his master had been made prisoner , he left massachusetts without hesitating an instant , arrived before richmond , and by dint of stratagem and shrewdness , after having risked his life twenty times over , managed to penetrate into the besieged town .
the pleasure of harding on seeing his servant , and the joy of neb at finding his master , can scarcely be described .
meanwhile grant continued his energetic operations .
the victory of petersburg had been very dearly bought .
his forces , united to those of butler , had as yet been unsuccessful before richmond , and nothing gave the prisoners any hope of a speedy deliverance .
the reporter , to whom his tedious captivity did not offer a single incident worthy of note , could stand it no longer .
several times had he even made the attempt , but was stopped by some insurmountable obstacle .
however , the siege continued ; and if the prisoners were anxious to escape and join grant 's army , certain of the besieged were no less anxious to join the southern forces . among them was one jonathan forster , a determined southerner .
the truth was , that if the prisoners of the secessionists could not leave the town , neither could the secessionists themselves while the northern army invested it .
thus jonathan forster accordingly conceived the idea of rising in a balloon , so as to pass over the besieging lines , and in that way reach the secessionist camp .
the governor authorized the attempt .
the departure of the balloon was fixed for the 18th of march .
it should be effected during the night , with a northwest wind of moderate force , and the aeronauts calculated that they would reach general lee 's camp in a few hours .
the tempest soon became such that forster 's departure was deferred , for it was impossible to risk the balloon and those whom it carried in the midst of the furious elements .
the 18th , the 19th of march passed without any alteration in the weather .
it is needless to say that he was a bold , dashing fellow , ready to dare anything and was astonished at nothing .
pencroft at the beginning of the year had gone to richmond on business , with a young boy of fifteen from new jersey , son of a former captain , an orphan , whom he loved as if he had been his own child .
he knew the engineer - officer by reputation ; he knew with what impatience that determined man chafed under his restraint .
" when ? " asked the engineer quickly , and it was evident that this question was uttered without consideration , for he had not yet examined the stranger who addressed him .
but after having with a penetrating eye observed the open face of the sailor , he was convinced that he had before him an honest man .
" who are you ? " he asked briefly .
pencroft made himself known .
there was no necessity for the sailor to finish his sentence .
the engineer understood him at once .
they risked nothing but their lives in its execution .
the hurricane was in all its violence , it is true , but so clever and daring an engineer as cyrus harding knew perfectly well how to manage a balloon .
captain harding had listened to the sailor without saying a word , but his eyes shone with satisfaction .
here was the long - sought - for opportunity -- he was not a man to let it pass .
the plan was feasible , though , it must be confessed , dangerous in the extreme .
in the night , in spite of their guards , they might approach the balloon , slip into the car , and then cut the cords which held it .
there was no doubt that they might be killed , but on the other hand they might succeed , and without this storm!--without this storm the balloon would have started already and the looked - for opportunity would not have then presented itself .
" i am not alone ! " said harding at last .
" how many people do you wish to bring with you ? " asked the sailor .
" two ; my friend spilett , and my servant neb . "
" that will be three , " replied pencroft ; " and with herbert and me five .
but the balloon will hold six-- "
what astonished him was , that so simple an idea had not occurred to him before .
as to neb , he followed his master wherever his master wished to go .
" this evening , then , " said pencroft , " we will all meet out there . "
" this evening , at ten o'clock , " replied captain harding ; " and heaven grant that the storm does not abate before our departure . "
pencroft took leave of the two friends , and returned to his lodging , where young herbert brown had remained .
the courageous boy knew of the sailor 's plan , and it was not without anxiety that he awaited the result of the proposal being made to the engineer .
thus five determined persons were about to abandon themselves to the mercy of the tempestuous elements !
no ! the storm did not abate , and neither jonathan forster nor his companions dreamed of confronting it in that frail car .
it would be a terrible journey .
the engineer only feared one thing ; it was that the balloon , held to the ground and dashed about by the wind , would be torn into shreds .
for several hours he roamed round the nearly - deserted square , surveying the apparatus .
evening arrived .
thick mists passed like clouds close to the ground . rain fell mingled with snow , it was very cold .
a mist hung over richmond .
it seemed as if the violent storm had produced a truce between the besiegers and the besieged , and that the cannon were silenced by the louder detonations of the storm .
the streets of the town were deserted .
it had not even appeared necessary in that horrible weather to place a guard in the square , in the midst of which plunged the balloon .
" dirty weather ! " exclaimed pencroft , fixing his hat firmly on his head with a blow of his fist ; " but pshaw , we shall succeed all the same ! "
at half - past nine , harding and his companions glided from different directions into the square , which the gas - lamps , extinguished by the wind , had left in total obscurity .
even the enormous balloon , almost beaten to the ground , could not be seen .
independently of the sacks of ballast , to which the cords of the net were fastened , the car was held by a strong cable passed through a ring in the pavement .
the five prisoners met by the car .
without speaking a word , harding , spilett , neb , and herbert took their places in the car , while pencroft by the engineer 's order detached successively the bags of ballast .
it was the work of a few minutes only , and the sailor rejoined his companions .
the balloon was then only held by the cable , and the engineer had nothing to do but to give the word .
at that moment a dog sprang with a bound into the car .
during the night the engineer could not dream of descending , and when day broke , even a glimpse of the earth below was intercepted by fog .
five days had passed when a partial clearing allowed them to see the wide extending ocean beneath their feet , now lashed into the maddest fury by the gale .
our readers will recollect what befell these five daring individuals who set out on their hazardous expedition in the balloon on the 20th of march .
chapter 3
the engineer , the meshes of the net having given way , had been carried off by a wave .
" forward , " cried the reporter ; and all four , spilett , herbert , pencroft , and neb , forgetting their fatigue , began their search .
poor neb shed bitter tears , giving way to despair at the thought of having lost the only being he loved on earth .
only two minutes had passed from the time when cyrus harding disappeared to the moment when his companions set foot on the ground .
they had hopes therefore of arriving in time to save him .
" yes , neb , " replied gideon spilett , " and we will find him too ! "
" living , i trust ! "
" still living ! "
" can he swim ? " asked pencroft .
" yes , " replied neb , " and besides , top is there . "
the sailor , observing the heavy surf on the shore , shook his head .
the engineer had disappeared to the north of the shore , and nearly half a mile from the place where the castaways had landed .
it was then nearly six o'clock .
a thick fog made the night very dark .
the castaways proceeded toward the north of the land on which chance had thrown them , an unknown region , the geographical situation of which they could not even guess .
they were walking upon a sandy soil , mingled with stones , which appeared destitute of any sort of vegetation .
the ground , very unequal and rough , was in some places perfectly riddled with holes , making walking extremely painful .
from these holes escaped every minute great birds of clumsy flight , which flew in all directions .
the sailor thought he recognized gulls and cormorants , whose shrill cries rose above the roaring of the sea .
they stopped to listen , but no sound arose above the roaring of the waves and the dashing of the surf .
the little band then continued their march forward , searching into every hollow of the shore .
after walking for twenty minutes , the four castaways were suddenly brought to a standstill by the sight of foaming billows close to their feet .
the solid ground ended here .
they found themselves at the extremity of a sharp point on which the sea broke furiously .
" well , let us call again , " and all uniting their voices , they gave a vigorous shout , but there came no reply .
they waited for a lull , then began again ; still no reply .
the castaways accordingly returned , following the opposite side of the promontory , over a soil equally sandy and rugged .
however , pencroft observed that the shore was more equal , that the ground rose , and he declared that it was joined by a long slope to a hill , whose massive front he thought that he could see looming indistinctly through the mist .
the noise of the surf was scarcely heard .
this side of the promontory evidently formed a semicircular bay , which the sharp point sheltered from the breakers of the open sea .
but to follow this direction was to go south , exactly opposite to that part of the coast where harding might have landed .
after a walk of a mile and a half , the shore presented no curve which would permit them to return to the north .
this promontory , of which they had turned the point , must be attached to the mainland .
the castaways , although their strength was nearly exhausted , still marched courageously forward , hoping every moment to meet with a sudden angle which would set them in the first direction .
what was their disappointment , when , after trudging nearly two miles , having reached an elevated point composed of slippery rocks , they found themselves again stopped by the sea .
" we are on an islet , " said pencroft , " and we have surveyed it from one extremity to the other . "
the sailor was right ; they had been thrown , not on a continent , not even on an island , but on an islet which was not more than two miles in length , with even a less breadth .
was this barren spot the desolate refuge of sea - birds , strewn with stones and destitute of vegetation , attached to a more important archipelago ?
it was impossible to say .
when the voyagers from their car saw the land through the mist , they had not been able to reconnoiter it sufficiently .
however , pencroft , accustomed with his sailor eyes to piece through the gloom , was almost certain that he could clearly distinguish in the west confused masses which indicated an elevated coast .
but they could not in the dark determine whether it was a single island , or connected with others .
" the silence of our friend proves nothing , " said the reporter .
" perhaps he has fainted or is wounded , and unable to reply directly , so we will not despair . "
the reporter then proposed to light a fire on a point of the islet , which would serve as a signal to the engineer .
but they searched in vain for wood or dry brambles ; nothing but sand and stones were to be found .
the grief of neb and his companions , who were all strongly attached to the intrepid harding , can be better pictured than described .
it was too evident that they were powerless to help him .
either the engineer had been able to save himself , and had already found a refuge on some point of the coast , or he was lost for ever !
the long and painful hours passed by .
the cold was intense . the castaways suffered cruelly , but they scarcely perceived it .
they did not even think of taking a minute 's rest . forgetting everything but their chief , hoping or wishing to hope on , they continued to walk up and down on this sterile spot , always returning to its northern point , where they could approach nearest to the scene of the catastrophe .
the sailor nodded ; besides , his eyes could not deceive him .
if he had discovered land , however indistinct it might appear , land was sure to be there .
but that distant echo was the only response produced by neb 's shouts , while a heavy gloom hung over all the part east of the island .
meanwhile , the sky was clearing little by little .
towards midnight the stars shone out , and if the engineer had been there with his companions he would have remarked that these stars did not belong to the northern hemisphere .
the night passed away .
towards five o'clock in the morning of the 25th of march , the sky began to lighten ; the horizon still remained dark , but with daybreak a thick mist rose from the sea , so that the eye could scarcely penetrate beyond twenty feet or so from where they stood .
at length the fog gradually unrolled itself in great heavily moving waves .
it was unfortunate , however , that the castaways could distinguish nothing around them .
while the gaze of the reporter and neb were cast upon the ocean , the sailor and herbert looked eagerly for the coast in the west .
but not a speck of land was visible .
but the fog was not long in rising .
it was only a fine - weather mist .
a hot sun soon penetrated to the surface of the island .
soon the isle appeared as if it had descended from a cloud , then the sea showed itself around them , spreading far away towards the east , but bounded on the west by an abrupt and precipitous coast .
yes ! the land was there .
their safety was at least provisionally insured .
the islet and the coast were separated by a channel about half a mile in breadth , through which rushed an extremely rapid current .
however , one of the castaways , following the impulse of his heart , immediately threw himself into the current , without consulting his companions , without saying a single word .
it was neb .
he was in haste to be on the other side , and to climb towards the north .
it had been impossible to hold him back .
pencroft called him in vain .
the reporter prepared to follow him , but pencroft stopped him .
" do you want to cross the channel ? " he asked .
" yes , " replied spilett .
" all right ! " said the seaman ; " wait a bit ; neb is well able to carry help to his master .
see , the tide is going down over the sand .
let us have patience , and at low water it is possible we may find a fordable passage . "
" you are right , " replied the reporter , " we will not separate more than we can help . "
during this time neb was struggling vigorously against the current .
he was crossing in an oblique direction .
his black shoulders could be seen emerging at each stroke .
he was carried down very quickly , but he also made way towards the shore .
it took more than half an hour to cross from the islet to the land , and he reached the shore several hundred feet from the place which was opposite to the point from which he had started .
landing at the foot of a high wall of granite , he shook himself vigorously ; and then , setting off running , soon disappeared behind a rocky point , which projected to nearly the height of the northern extremity of the islet .
neb 's companions had watched his daring attempt with painful anxiety , and when he was out of sight , they fixed their attention on the land where their hope of safety lay , while eating some shell - fish with which the sand was strewn .
it was a wretched repast , but still it was better than nothing .
the opposite coast formed one vast bay , terminating on the south by a very sharp point , which was destitute of all vegetation , and was of a very wild aspect .
this point abutted on the shore in a grotesque outline of high granite rocks .
towards the north , on the contrary , the bay widened , and a more rounded coast appeared , trending from the southwest to the northeast , and terminating in a slender cape .
the distance between these two extremities , which made the bow of the bay , was about eight miles .
half a mile from the shore rose the islet , which somewhat resembled the carcass of a gigantic whale .
its extreme breadth was not more than a quarter of a mile .
opposite the islet , the beach consisted first of sand , covered with black stones , which were now appearing little by little above the retreating tide .
the second level was separated by a perpendicular granite cliff , terminated at the top by an unequal edge at a height of at least 300 feet .
it continued thus for a length of three miles , ending suddenly on the right with a precipice which looked as if cut by the hand of man .
on the upper plateau of the coast not a tree appeared .
it was a flat tableland like that above cape town at the cape of good hope , but of reduced proportions ; at least so it appeared seen from the islet .
however , verdure was not wanting to the right beyond the precipice .
they could easily distinguish a confused mass of great trees , which extended beyond the limits of their view .
this verdure relieved the eye , so long wearied by the continued ranges of granite .
lastly , beyond and above the plateau , in a northwesterly direction and at a distance of at least seven miles , glittered a white summit which reflected the sun 's rays .
it was that of a lofty mountain , capped with snow .
the question could not at present be decided whether this land formed an island , or whether it belonged to a continent .
but on beholding the convulsed masses heaped up on the left , no geologist would have hesitated to give them a volcanic origin , for they were unquestionably the work of subterranean convulsions .
" well , " asked herbert , " what do you say , pencroft ? "
" there is some good and some bad , as in everything , " replied the sailor .
" we shall see .
but now the ebb is evidently making .
pencroft was not wrong in his anticipations .
three hours later at low tide , the greater part of the sand forming the bed of the channel was uncovered .
between the islet and the coast there only remained a narrow channel which would no doubt be easy to cross .
about ten o'clock , gideon spilett and his companions stripped themselves of their clothes , which they placed in bundles on their heads , and then ventured into the water , which was not more than five feet deep .
herbert , for whom it was too deep , swam like a fish , and got through capitally .
all three arrived without difficulty on the opposite shore .
chapter 4
all at once the reporter sprang up , and telling the sailor that he would rejoin them at that same place , he climbed the cliff in the direction which the negro neb had taken a few hours before .
anxiety hastened his steps , for he longed to obtain news of his friend , and he soon disappeared round an angle of the cliff .
herbert wished to accompany him .
our friends will want something when they come back .
there is work for everybody . "
" i am ready , " replied herbert .
" all right , " said the sailor ; " that will do .
we must set about it regularly .
we are tired , cold , and hungry ; therefore we must have shelter , fire , and food .
there is wood in the forest , and eggs in nests ; we have only to find a house . "
" all right , " said pencroft ; " go on , my boy . "
now , on the one hand it was important to settle themselves in the neighborhood of a good stream of water , and on the other it was possible that the current had thrown cyrus harding on the shore there .
the cliff , as has been said , rose to a height of three hundred feet , but the mass was unbroken throughout , and even at its base , scarcely washed by the sea , it did not offer the smallest fissure which would serve as a dwelling .
it was a perpendicular wall of very hard granite , which even the waves had not worn away .
however , herbert , who had gone forward a little more to the left , soon came upon rocks covered with sea - weed , which , some hours later , would be hidden by the high tide .
on these rocks , in the midst of slippery wrack , abounded bivalve shell - fish , not to be despised by starving people .
herbert called pencroft , who ran up hastily .
" here are mussels ! " cried the sailor ; " these will do instead of eggs ! "
" they are not mussels , " replied herbert , who was attentively examining the molluscs attached to the rocks ; " they are lithodomes . "
" are they good to eat ? " asked pencroft .
" perfectly so . "
" then let us eat some lithodomes . "
his father had encouraged him in it , by letting him attend the lectures of the best professors in boston , who were very fond of the intelligent , industrious lad .
and his turn for natural history was , more than once in the course of time , of great use , and he was not mistaken in this instance .
these lithodomes were oblong shells , suspended in clusters and adhering very tightly to the rocks .
they belong to that species of molluscous perforators which excavate holes in the hardest stone ; their shell is rounded at both ends , a feature which is not remarked in the common mussel .
pencroft and herbert made a good meal of the lithodomes , which were then half opened to the sun .
they ate them as oysters , and as they had a strong peppery taste , they were palatable without condiments of any sort .
their hunger was thus appeased for the time , but not their thirst , which increased after eating these naturally - spiced molluscs .
pencroft and herbert , after having taken the precaution of collecting an ample supply of lithodomes , with which they filled their pockets and handkerchiefs , regained the foot of the cliff .
two hundred paces farther they arrived at the cutting , through which , as pencroft had guessed , ran a stream of water , whether fresh or not was to be ascertained .
at this place the wall appeared to have been separated by some violent subterranean force .
at its base was hollowed out a little creek , the farthest part of which formed a tolerably sharp angle .
the watercourse at that part measured one hundred feet in breadth , and its two banks on each side were scarcely twenty feet high .
the river became strong almost directly between the two walls of granite , which began to sink above the mouth ; it then suddenly turned and disappeared beneath a wood of stunted trees half a mile off .
" well , herbert , now we only want the house . "
the water of the river was limpid .
the sailor ascertained that at this time -- that is to say , at low tide , when the rising floods did not reach it -- it was sweet .
this important point established , herbert looked for some cavity which would serve them as a retreat , but in vain ; everywhere the wall appeared smooth , plain , and perpendicular .
however , at the mouth of the watercourse and above the reach of the high tide , the convulsions of nature had formed , not a grotto , but a pile of enormous rocks , such as are often met with in granite countries and which bear the name of " chimneys . "
" we shall see him again , pencroft , " cried herbert , " and when he returns he must find a tolerable dwelling here .
it will be so , if we can make a fireplace in the left passage and keep an opening for the smoke . "
" so we can , my boy , " replied the sailor , " and these chimneys will serve our turn .
let us set to work , but first come and get a store of fuel .
i think some branches will be very useful in stopping up these openings , through which the wind shrieks like so many fiends . "
herbert and pencroft left the chimneys , and , turning the angle , they began to climb the left bank of the river .
the current here was quite rapid , and drifted down some dead wood .
the sailor then thought that they could utilize this ebb and flow for the transport of heavy objects .
after having walked for a quarter of an hour , the sailor and the boy arrived at the angle which the river made in turning towards the left .
from this point its course was pursued through a forest of magnificent trees . these trees still retained their verdure , notwithstanding the advanced season , for they belonged to the family of " coniferae , " which is spread over all the regions of the globe , from northern climates to the tropics .
the young naturalist recognized especially the " deedara , " which are very numerous in the himalayan zone , and which spread around them a most agreeable odor .
between these beautiful trees sprang up clusters of firs , whose opaque open parasol boughs spread wide around .
among the long grass , pencroft felt that his feet were crushing dry branches which crackled like fireworks .
" let us get a supply , " replied herbert , who immediately set to work .
the collection was easily made .
the wood , being very dry , would burn rapidly ; it was therefore necessary to carry to the chimneys a considerable quantity , and the loads of two men would not be sufficient .
herbert remarked this .
" well , my boy , " replied the sailor , " there must be some way of carrying this wood ; there is always a way of doing everything .
if we had a cart or a boat , it would be easy enough . "
" but we have the river , " said herbert .
" right , " replied pencroft ; " the river will be to us like a road which carries of itself , and rafts have not been invented for nothing . "
" only , " observed herbert , " at this moment our road is going the wrong way , for the tide is rising ! "
let us get the raft ready . "
they both carried , each in proportion to his strength , a load of wood bound in fagots .
they found on the bank also a great quantity of dead branches in the midst of grass , among which the foot of man had probably never before trod .
pencroft began directly to make his raft .
in a kind of little bay , created by a point of the shore which broke the current , the sailor and the lad placed some good - sized pieces of wood , which they had fastened together with dry creepers . a raft was thus formed , on which they stacked all they had collected , sufficient , indeed , to have loaded at least twenty men .
in an hour the work was finished , and the raft moored to the bank , awaited the turning of the tide .
exactly two hundred feet behind the angle formed by the river , the wall , terminated by a fall of rocks , died away in a gentle slope to the edge of the forest .
it was a natural staircase .
herbert and the sailor began their ascent ; thanks to the vigor of their muscles they reached the summit in a few minutes ; and proceeded to the point above the mouth of the river .
on attaining it , their first look was cast upon the ocean which not long before they had traversed in such a terrible condition .
they observed , with emotion , all that part to the north of the coast on which the catastrophe had taken place .
it was there that cyrus harding had disappeared .
they looked to see if some portion of their balloon , to which a man might possibly cling , yet existed .
as to the coast , it was solitary also .
neither the reporter nor neb could be anywhere seen .
but it was possible that at this time they were both too far away to be perceived .
" something tells me , " cried herbert , " that a man as energetic as captain harding would not let himself be drowned like other people .
he must have reached some point of the shore ; do n't you think so , pencroft ? "
the sailor shook his head sadly .
in the meantime he examined the coast with great attention .
stretched out below them was the sandy shore , bounded on the right of the river 's mouth by lines of breakers .
the rocks which were visible appeared like amphibious monsters reposing in the surf .
beyond the reef , the sea sparkled beneath the sun 's rays .
to the south a sharp point closed the horizon , and it could not be seen if the land was prolonged in that direction , or if it ran southeast and southwest , which would have made this coast a very long peninsula .
at the northern extremity of the bay the outline of the shore was continued to a great distance in a wider curve .
there the shore was low , flat , without cliffs , and with great banks of sand , which the tide left uncovered .
pencroft and herbert then returned towards the west . their attention was first arrested by the snow - topped mountain which rose at a distance of six or seven miles .
from its first declivities to within two miles of the coast were spread vast masses of wood , relieved by large green patches , caused by the presence of evergreen trees .
at the point where the sailor had left his raft of wood , it began to run between the two high granite walls ; but if on the left bank the wall remained clear and abrupt , on the right bank , on the contrary , it sank gradually , the massive sides changed to isolated rocks , the rocks to stones , the stones to shingle running to the extremity of the point .
" are we on an island ? " murmured the sailor .
" at any rate , it seems to be big enough , " replied the lad .
" an island , ever so big , is an island all the same ! " said pencroft .
but this important question could not yet be answered .
a more perfect survey had to be made to settle the point .
as to the land itself , island or continent , it appeared fertile , agreeable in its aspect , and varied in its productions .
" this is satisfactory , " observed pencroft ; " and in our misfortune , we must thank providence for it . "
" god be praised ! " responded herbert , whose pious heart was full of gratitude to the author of all things .
pencroft and herbert examined for some time the country on which they had been cast ; but it was difficult to guess after so hasty an inspection what the future had in store for them .
they then returned , following the southern crest of the granite platform , bordered by a long fringe of jagged rocks , of the most whimsical shapes .
some hundreds of birds lived there nestled in the holes of the stone ; herbert , jumping over the rocks , startled a whole flock of these winged creatures .
" oh ! " cried he , " those are not gulls nor sea - mews ! "
" what are they then ? " asked pencroft .
" just so , but these are wild or rock pigeons .
i recognize them by the double band of black on the wing , by the white tail , and by their slate - colored plumage .
but if the rock - pigeon is good to eat , its eggs must be excellent , and we will soon see how many they may have left in their nests ! "
" we will not give them time to hatch , unless it is in the shape of an omelet ! " replied pencroft merrily .
" but what will you make your omelet in ? " asked herbert ; " in your hat ? "
pencroft and herbert attentively examined the cavities in the granite , and they really found eggs in some of the hollows .
a few dozen being collected , were packed in the sailor 's handkerchief , and as the time when the tide would be full was approaching , pencroft and herbert began to redescend towards the watercourse .
when they arrived there , it was an hour after midday .
the tide had already turned . they must now avail themselves of the ebb to take the wood to the mouth .
but a sailor is never at a loss when there is a question of cables or ropes , and pencroft rapidly twisted a cord , a few fathoms long , made of dry creepers .
this vegetable cable was fastened to the after - part of the raft , and the sailor held it in his hand while herbert , pushing off the raft with a long pole , kept it in the current .
this succeeded capitally .
the bank was very equal ; there was no fear that the raft would run aground , and before two o'clock they arrived at the river 's mouth , a few paces from the chimneys .
chapter 5
one narrow and winding opening at the side was kept , to lead out the smoke and to make the fire draw .
the cave was thus divided into three or four rooms , if such dark dens with which a donkey would scarcely have been contented deserved the name .
but they were dry , and there was space to stand upright , at least in the principal room , which occupied the center .
the floor was covered with fine sand , and taking all in all they were well pleased with it for want of a better .
" perhaps , " said herbert , while he and pencroft were working , " our companions have found a superior place to ours . "
" very likely , " replied the seaman ; " but , as we do n't know , we must work all the same .
better to have two strings to one 's bow than no string at all ! "
" oh ! " exclaimed herbert , " how jolly it will be if they were to find captain harding and were to bring him back with them ! "
" yes , indeed ! " said pencroft , " that was a man of the right sort . "
" was ! " exclaimed herbert , " do you despair of ever seeing him again ? "
" god forbid ! " replied the sailor .
" now , " said he , " our friends can come back when they like .
they will find a good enough shelter . "
they now had only to make a fireplace and to prepare the supper -- an easy task .
large flat stones were placed on the ground at the opening of the narrow passage which had been kept .
this , if the smoke did not take the heat out with it , would be enough to maintain an equal temperature inside .
their wood was stowed away in one of the rooms , and the sailor laid in the fireplace some logs and brushwood .
" still we might get fire as the savages do , " replied herbert , " by rubbing two bits of dry stick one against the other . "
" all right ; try , my boy , and let 's see if you can do anything besides exercising your arms . "
" well , it 's a very simple proceeding , and much used in the islands of the pacific . "
i must say i prefer matches .
by the bye , where are my matches ? "
pencroft searched in his waistcoat for the box , which was always there , for he was a confirmed smoker .
he could not find it ; he rummaged the pockets of his trousers , but , to his horror , he could nowhere discover the box .
" here 's a go ! " said he , looking at herbert .
" the box must have fallen out of my pocket and got lost !
the sailor rushed out , followed by the boy .
on the sand , among the rocks , near the river 's bank , they both searched carefully , but in vain .
the box was of copper , and therefore would have been easily seen .
" pencroft , " asked herbert , " did n't you throw it out of the car ? "
" i knew better than that , " replied the sailor ; " but such a small article could easily disappear in the tumbling about we have gone through .
i would rather even have lost my pipe !
confound the box !
where can it be ? "
" look here , the tide is going down , " said herbert ; " let 's run to the place where we landed . "
it was scarcely probable that they would find the box , which the waves had rolled about among the pebbles , at high tide , but it was as well to try .
herbert and pencroft walked rapidly to the point where they had landed the day before , about two hundred feet from the cave .
they hunted there , among the shingle , in the clefts of the rocks , but found nothing .
if the box had fallen at this place it must have been swept away by the waves .
as the sea went down , they searched every little crevice with no result .
it was a grave loss in their circumstances , and for the time irreparable .
pencroft could not hide his vexation ; he looked very anxious , but said not a word .
herbert tried to console him by observing , that if they had found the matches , they would , very likely , have been wetted by the sea and useless .
" we shall certainly find some way of making a fire , " said herbert .
" captain harding or mr . spilett will not be without them . "
" yes , " replied pencroft ; " but in the meantime we are without fire , and our companions will find but a sorry repast on their return . "
" but , " said herbert quickly , " do you think it possible that they have no tinder or matches ? "
" i doubt it , " replied the sailor , shaking his head , " for neither neb nor captain harding smoke , and i believe that mr . spilett would rather keep his note - book than his match - box . "
herbert did not reply .
before returning to the cave , the sailor and herbert , in the event of fire being positively unattainable , collected some more shell - fish , and then silently retraced their steps to their dwelling .
pencroft , his eyes fixed on the ground , still looked for his box .
it was five in the evening when he and herbert re - entered the cave .
it is useless to say that the darkest corners of the passages were ransacked before they were obliged to give it up in despair .
towards six o'clock , when the sun was disappearing behind the high lands of the west , herbert , who was walking up and down on the strand , signalized the return of neb and spilett .
they were returning alone ! ...
the reporter , on his arrival , sat down on a rock , without saying anything .
exhausted with fatigue , dying of hunger , he had not strength to utter a word .
as to neb , his red eyes showed how he had cried , and the tears which he could not restrain told too clearly that he had lost all hope .
the reporter recounted all that they had done in their attempt to recover cyrus harding .
he and neb had surveyed the coast for a distance of eight miles and consequently much beyond the place where the balloon had fallen the last time but one , a fall which was followed by the disappearance of the engineer and the dog top .
the shore was solitary ; not a vestige of a mark .
not even a pebble recently displaced ; not a trace on the sand ; not a human footstep on all that part of the beach .
it was clear that that portion of the shore had never been visited by a human being .
the sea was as deserted as the land , and it was there , a few hundred feet from the coast , that the engineer must have found a tomb .
as spilett ended his account , neb jumped up , exclaiming in a voice which showed how hope struggled within him , " no ! he is not dead ! he ca n't be dead !
it might happen to any one else , but never to him !
he could get out of anything ! "
then his strength forsaking him , " oh !
i can do no more ! " he murmured .
" neb , " said herbert , running to him , " we will find him !
god will give him back to us !
but in the meantime you are hungry , and you must eat something . "
so saying , he offered the poor negro a few handfuls of shell - fish , which was indeed wretched and insufficient food .
neb had not eaten anything for several hours , but he refused them .
he could not , would not live without his master .
as to gideon spilett , he devoured the shell - fish , then he laid himself down on the sand , at the foot of a rock .
he was very weak , but calm .
herbert went up to him , and taking his hand , " sir , " said he , " we have found a shelter which will be better than lying here .
night is advancing .
the reporter got up , and guided by the boy went towards the cave .
on the way , pencroft asked him in the most natural tone , if by chance he happened to have a match or two .
the reporter stopped , felt in his pockets , but finding nothing said , " i had some , but i must have thrown them away . "
the seaman then put the same question to neb and received the same answer .
" confound it ! " exclaimed the sailor .
the reporter heard him and seizing his arm , " have you no matches ? " he asked .
" not one , and no fire in consequence . "
" ah ! " cried neb , " if my master was here , he would know what to do ! "
the four castaways remained motionless , looking uneasily at each other .
herbert was the first to break the silence by saying , " mr . spilett , you are a smoker and always have matches about you ; perhaps you have n't looked well , try again , a single match will be enough ! "
the reporter hunted again in the pockets of his trousers , waistcoat , and great - coat , and at last to pencroft 's great joy , no less to his extreme surprise , he felt a tiny piece of wood entangled in the lining of his waistcoat .
he seized it with his fingers through the stuff , but he could not get it out .
if this was a match and a single one , it was of great importance not to rub off the phosphorus .
" will you let me try ? " said the boy , and very cleverly , without breaking it , he managed to draw out the wretched yet precious little bit of wood which was of such great importance to these poor men .
it was unused .
" hurrah ! " cried pencroft ; " it is as good as having a whole cargo ! "
he took the match , and , followed by his companions , entered the cave .
this small piece of wood , of which so many in an inhabited country are wasted with indifference and are of no value , must here be used with the greatest caution .
the sailor first made sure that it was quite dry ; that done , " we must have some paper , " said he .
" here , " replied spilett , after some hesitation tearing a leaf out of his note - book .
pencroft took the piece of paper which the reporter held out to him , and knelt down before the fireplace .
some handfuls of grass , leaves , and dry moss were placed under the fagots and disposed in such a way that the air could easily circulate , and the dry wood would rapidly catch fire .
pencroft then twisted the piece of paper into the shape of a cone , as smokers do in a high wind , and poked it in among the moss .
taking a small , rough stone , he wiped it carefully , and with a beating heart , holding his breath , he gently rubbed the match .
pencroft had not struck hard enough , fearing to rub off the phosphorus .
certainly the boy had never in all his life been so nervous .
prometheus going to steal the fire from heaven could not have been more anxious .
he did not hesitate , however , but struck the match directly .
a little spluttering was heard and a tiny blue flame sprang up , making a choking smoke .
herbert quickly turned the match so as to augment the flame , and then slipped it into the paper cone , which in a few seconds too caught fire , and then the moss .
a minute later the dry wood crackled and a cheerful flame , assisted by the vigorous blowing of the sailor , sprang up in the midst of the darkness .
" at last ! " cried pencroft , getting up ; " i was never so nervous before in all my life ! "
they must now take great care not to let the fire go out , and always to keep some embers alight .
pencroft 's first thought was to use the fire by preparing a more nourishing supper than a dish of shell - fish .
two dozen eggs were brought by herbert .
the reporter leaning up in a corner , watched these preparations without saying anything .
a threefold thought weighed on his mind .
was cyrus still alive ?
if he was alive , where was he ?
if he had survived from his fall , how was it that he had not found some means of making known his existence ?
as to neb , he was roaming about the shore .
pencroft knew fifty ways of cooking eggs , but this time he had no choice , and was obliged to content himself with roasting them under the hot cinders .
in a few minutes the cooking was done , and the seaman invited the reporter to take his share of the supper .
such was the first repast of the castaways on this unknown coast .
the hard eggs were excellent , and as eggs contain everything indispensable to man 's nourishment , these poor people thought themselves well off , and were much strengthened by them .
oh ! if only one of them had not been missing at this meal !
if the five prisoners who escaped from richmond had been all there , under the piled - up rocks , before this clear , crackling fire on the dry sand , what thanksgiving must they have rendered to heaven !
but the most ingenious , the most learned , he who was their unquestioned chief , cyrus harding , was , alas ! missing , and his body had not even obtained a burial - place .
thus passed the 25th of march .
night had come on .
the waves rolled the shingle backwards and forwards with a deafening noise .
the reporter retired into a dark corner after having shortly noted down the occurrences of the day ; the first appearance of this new land , the loss of their leader , the exploration of the coast , the incident of the matches , etc . ; and then overcome by fatigue , he managed to forget his sorrows in sleep .
herbert went to sleep directly .
as to the sailor , he passed the night with one eye on the fire , on which he did not spare fuel .
chapter 6
the inventory of the articles possessed by these castaways from the clouds , thrown upon a coast which appeared to be uninhabited , was soon made out .
they had nothing , save the clothes which they were wearing at the time of the catastrophe .
we must mention , however , a note - book and a watch which gideon spilett had kept , doubtless by inadvertence , not a weapon , not a tool , not even a pocket - knife ; for while in the car they had thrown out everything to lighten the balloon .
but here , not any instrument whatever , not a utensil .
from nothing they must supply themselves with everything .
alas ! they must hope no longer again to see cyrus harding .
the castaways could expect nothing but from themselves and from that providence which never abandons those whose faith is sincere .
but ought they to establish themselves on this part of the coast , without trying to know to what continent it belonged , if it was inhabited , or if they were on the shore of a desert island ?
it was an important question , and should be solved with the shortest possible delay .
from its answer they would know what measures to take .
however , according to pencroft 's advice , it appeared best to wait a few days before commencing an exploration .
the chimneys offered a retreat sufficient for the present .
the fire was lighted , and it was easy to preserve some embers .
there were plenty of shell - fish and eggs among the rocks and on the beach .
this plan suited neb particularly .
as obstinate in his ideas as in his presentiments , he was in no haste to abandon this part of the coast , the scene of the catastrophe .
he did not , he would not believe in the loss of cyrus harding .
no , it did not seem to him possible that such a man had ended in this vulgar fashion , carried away by a wave , drowned in the floods , a few hundred feet from a shore .
as long as the waves had not cast up the body of the engineer , as long as he , neb , had not seen with his eyes , touched with his hands the corpse of his master , he would not believe in his death !
and this idea rooted itself deeper than ever in his determined heart .
he was like the dog who will not leave the place where his master is buried , and his grief was such that most probably he would not survive him .
this same morning , the 26th of march , at daybreak , neb had set out on the shore in a northerly direction , and he had returned to the spot where the sea , no doubt , had closed over the unfortunate harding .
that day 's breakfast was composed solely of pigeon 's eggs and lithodomes .
herbert had found some salt deposited by evaporation in the hollows of the rocks , and this mineral was very welcome .
the reporter accordingly remained behind .
" to the chase , herbert , " said the sailor .
" we shall find ammunition on our way , and cut our weapons in the forest . "
but at the moment of starting , herbert observed , that since they had no tinder , it would perhaps be prudent to replace it by another substance .
" what ? " asked pencroft .
" burnt linen , " replied the boy .
" that could in case of need serve for tinder . "
the sailor thought it very sensible advice .
only it had the inconvenience of necessitating the sacrifice of a piece of handkerchief .
notwithstanding , the thing was well worth while trying , and a part of pencroft 's large checked handkerchief was soon reduced to the state of a half - burnt rag .
this inflammable material was placed in the central chamber at the bottom of a little cavity in the rock , sheltered from all wind and damp .
herbert and pencroft turned the angle of the chimneys , not without having cast a look at the smoke which , just at that place , curled round a point of rock : they ascended the left bank of the river .
arrived at the forest , pencroft broke from the first tree two stout branches which he transformed into clubs , the ends of which herbert rubbed smooth on a rock .
oh ! what would they not have given for a knife !
the two hunters now advanced among the long grass , following the bank .
from the turning which directed its course to the southwest , the river narrowed gradually and the channel lay between high banks , over which the trees formed a double arch .
herbert often glided among the broken stumps with the agility of a young cat , and disappeared in the underwood .
but pencroft called him back directly , begging him not to wander away .
meanwhile , the sailor attentively observed the disposition and nature of the surrounding country .
on the left bank , the ground , which was flat and marshy , rose imperceptibly towards the interior .
it looked there like a network of liquid threads which doubtless reached the river by some underground drain .
sometimes a stream ran through the underwood , which they crossed without difficulty .
the opposite shore appeared to be more uneven , and the valley of which the river occupied the bottom was more clearly visible .
the hill , covered with trees disposed in terraces , intercepted the view .
on the right bank walking would have been difficult , for the declivities fell suddenly , and the trees bending over the water were only sustained by the strength of their roots .
it is needless to add that this forest , as well as the coast already surveyed , was destitute of any sign of human life .
pencroft only saw traces of quadrupeds , fresh footprints of animals , of which he could not recognize the species .
in all probability , and such was also herbert 's opinion , some had been left by formidable wild beasts which doubtless would give them some trouble ; but nowhere did they observe the mark of an axe on the trees , nor the ashes of a fire , nor the impression of a human foot . on this they might probably congratulate themselves , for on any land in the middle of the pacific the presence of man was perhaps more to be feared than desired .
herbert and pencroft speaking little , for the difficulties of the way were great , advanced very slowly , and after walking for an hour they had scarcely gone more than a mile .
as yet the hunt had not been successful .
however , some birds sang and fluttered in the foliage , and appeared very timid , as if man had inspired them with an instinctive fear .
" that must be a jacamar , " said herbert , trying to get nearer .
" this will be a good opportunity to taste jacamar , " replied the sailor , " if that fellow is in a humor to be roasted ! "
" how clumsy i am ! " cried herbert .
" no , no , my boy ! " replied the sailor .
" the blow was well aimed ; many a one would have missed it altogether !
come , do n't be vexed with yourself .
we shall catch it another day ! "
as the hunters advanced , the trees were found to be more scattered , many being magnificent , but none bore eatable fruit .
pencroft searched in vain for some of those precious palm - trees which are employed in so many ways in domestic life , and which have been found as far as the fortieth parallel in the northern hemisphere , and to the thirty - fifth only in the southern hemisphere .
but this forest was only composed of coniferae , such as deodaras , already recognized by herbert , and douglas pine , similar to those which grow on the northwest coast of america , and splendid firs , measuring a hundred and fifty feet in height .
at this moment a flock of birds , of a small size and pretty plumage , with long glancing tails , dispersed themselves among the branches strewing their feathers , which covered the ground as with fine down .
herbert picked up a few of these feathers , and after having examined them,--
" these are couroucous , " said he .
" i should prefer a moor - cock or guinea - fowl , " replied pencroft , " still , if they are good to eat-- "
" they are good to eat , and also their flesh is very delicate , " replied herbert .
" besides , if i do n't mistake , it is easy to approach and kill them with a stick . "
the sailor and the lad , creeping among the grass , arrived at the foot of a tree , whose lower branches were covered with little birds .
the couroucous were waiting the passage of insects which served for their nourishment .
their feathery feet could be seen clasping the slender twigs which supported them .
the hunters then rose , and using their sticks like scythes , they mowed down whole rows of these couroucous , who never thought of flying away , and stupidly allowed themselves to be knocked off .
a hundred were already heaped on the ground , before the others made up their minds to fly .
" well , " said pencroft , " here is game , which is quite within the reach of hunters like us .
we have only to put out our hands and take it ! "
the sailor having strung the couroucous like larks on flexible twigs , they then continued their exploration .
the stream here made a bend towards the south , but this detour was probably not prolonged for the river must have its source in the mountain , and be supplied by the melting of the snow which covered the sides of the central cone .
the particular object of their expedition was , as has been said , to procure the greatest possible quantity of game for the inhabitants of the chimneys .
so the sailor actively pursued his researches , though he exclaimed , when some animal which he had not even time to recognize fled into the long grass , " if only we had had the dog top ! "
but top had disappeared at the same time as his master , and had probably perished with him .
towards three o'clock new flocks of birds were seen through certain trees , at whose aromatic berries they were pecking , those of the juniper - tree among others .
suddenly a loud trumpet call resounded through the forest .
this strange and sonorous cry was produced by a game bird called grouse in the united states .
they soon saw several couples , whose plumage was rich chestnut - brown mottled with dark brown , and tail of the same color .
herbert recognized the males by the two wing - like appendages raised on the neck .
pencroft determined to get hold of at least one of these gallinaceae , which were as large as a fowl , and whose flesh is better than that of a pullet .
after several fruitless attempts , which resulted in nothing but scaring the grouse , the sailor said to the lad,--
" decidedly , since we ca n't kill them on the wing , we must try to take them with a line . "
" like a fish ? " cried herbert , much surprised at the proposal .
" like a fish , " replied the sailor quite seriously .
pencroft had found among the grass half a dozen grouse nests , each having three or four eggs .
he took great care not to touch these nests , to which their proprietors would not fail to return .
it was around these that he meant to stretch his lines , not snares , but real fishing - lines .
he took herbert to some distance from the nests , and there prepared his singular apparatus with all the care which a disciple of izaak walton would have used .
herbert watched the work with great interest , though rather doubting its success .
the lines were made of fine creepers , fastened one to the other , of the length of fifteen or twenty feet .
this done , pencroft , passing among the grass and concealing himself skillfully , placed the end of his lines armed with hooks near the grouse nests ; then he returned , took the other ends and hid with herbert behind a large tree .
a whole half - hour passed , but then , as the sailor had surmised , several couple of grouse returned to their nests .
they walked along , pecking the ground , and not suspecting in any way the presence of the hunters , who , besides , had taken care to place themselves to leeward of the gallinaceae .
the lad felt at this moment highly interested .
he held his breath , and pencroft , his eyes staring , his mouth open , his lips advanced , as if about to taste a piece of grouse , scarcely breathed .
meanwhile , the birds walked about the hooks , without taking any notice of them .
pencroft then gave little tugs which moved the bait as if the worms had been still alive .
the jerks attracted the attention of the gallinaceae , and they attacked the hooks with their beaks .
three voracious grouse swallowed at the same moment bait and hook .
suddenly with a smart jerk , pencroft " struck " his line , and a flapping of wings showed that the birds were taken .
" hurrah ! " he cried , rushing towards the game , of which he made himself master in an instant .
herbert clapped his hands .
it was the first time that he had ever seen birds taken with a line , but the sailor modestly confessed that it was not his first attempt , and that besides he could not claim the merit of invention .
" and at any rate , " added he , " situated as we are , we must hope to hit upon many other contrivances . "
the grouse were fastened by their claws , and pencroft , delighted at not having to appear before their companions with empty hands , and observing that the day had begun to decline , judged it best to return to their dwelling .
the direction was indicated by the river , whose course they had only to follow , and , towards six o'clock , tired enough with their excursion , herbert and pencroft arrived at the chimneys .
gideon spilett was standing motionless on the shore , his arms crossed , gazing over the sea , the horizon of which was lost towards the east in a thick black cloud which was spreading rapidly towards the zenith .
the wind was already strong , and increased with the decline of day .
the whole sky was of a threatening aspect , and the first symptoms of a violent storm were clearly visible .
herbert entered the chimneys , and pencroft went towards the reporter .
the latter , deeply absorbed , did not see him approach .
" we are going to have a dirty night , mr . spilett ! " said the sailor : " petrels delight in wind and rain . "
the reporter , turning at the moment , saw pencroft , and his first words were,--
" at what distance from the coast would you say the car was , when the waves carried off our companion ? "
the sailor had not expected this question .
" two cables lengths at the most . "
" but what is a cable 's length ? " asked gideon spilett .
" about a hundred and twenty fathoms , or six hundred feet . "
" then , " said the reporter , " cyrus harding must have disappeared twelve hundred feet at the most from the shore ? "
" about that , " replied pencroft .
" and his dog also ? "
" also . "
" what astonishes me , " rejoined the reporter , " while admitting that our companion has perished , is that top has also met his death , and that neither the body of the dog nor of his master has been cast on the shore ! "
" it is not astonishing , with such a heavy sea , " replied the sailor .
" besides , it is possible that currents have carried them farther down the coast . "
" then , it is your opinion that our friend has perished in the waves ? " again asked the reporter .
" that is my opinion . "
" my own opinion , " said gideon spilett , " with due deference to your experience , pencroft , is that in the double fact of the absolute disappearance of cyrus and top , living or dead , there is something unaccountable and unlikely . "
" i wish i could think like you , mr . spilett , " replied pencroft ; " unhappily , my mind is made up on this point . "
having said this , the sailor returned to the chimneys .
a good fire crackled on the hearth .
herbert had just thrown on an armful of dry wood , and the flame cast a bright light into the darkest parts of the passage .
pencroft immediately began to prepare the dinner .
it appeared best to introduce something solid into the bill of fare , for all needed to get up their strength .
the strings of couroucous were kept for the next day , but they plucked a couple of grouse , which were soon spitted on a stick , and roasting before a blazing fire .
at seven in the evening neb had not returned .
the prolonged absence of the negro made pencroft very uneasy .
it was to be feared that he had met with an accident on this unknown land , or that the unhappy fellow had been driven to some act of despair .
why had neb not returned unless hope still detained him ?
perhaps he had found some mark , a footstep , a trace which had put him in the right path .
thus the lad reasoned .
gideon spilett approved of the sailor 's opinion that it was best not to divide , and herbert was obliged to give up his project ; but two large tears fell from his eyes .
the reporter could not refrain from embracing the generous boy .
bad weather now set in .
a furious gale from the southeast passed over the coast .
between the river 's mouth and the end of the cliff , eddies of wind whirled and gusts from this maelstrom lashed the water which ran through the narrow valley .
the smoke from the fireplace was also driven back through the opening , filling the passages and rendering them uninhabitable .
therefore , as the grouse were cooked , pencroft let the fire die away , and only preserved a few embers buried under the ashes .
at eight o'clock neb had not appeared , but there was no doubt that the frightful weather alone hindered his return , and that he must have taken refuge in some cave , to await the end of the storm or at least the return of day .
as to going to meet him , or attempting to find him , it was impossible .
their meal concluded , each retired to the corner in which he had rested the preceding night , and herbert was not long in going to sleep near the sailor , who had stretched himself beside the fireplace .
happily the pile of rocks which formed the chimneys was solid .
however he heard the noise of stones torn from the summit of the plateau by the wind , falling down on to the beach .
a few even rolled on to the upper part of the chimneys , or flew off in fragments when they were projected perpendicularly .
notwithstanding the fury of the hurricane , the uproar of the tempest , the thunder , and the tumult , herbert slept profoundly .
sleep at last took possession of pencroft , whom a seafaring life had habituated to anything .
the presentiments which had troubled herbert did not cease to agitate him also .
why had neb not returned ?
he tossed about on his sandy couch , scarcely giving a thought to the struggle of the elements .
now and then , his eyes , heavy with fatigue , closed for an instant , but some sudden thought reopened them almost immediately .
meanwhile the night advanced , and it was perhaps two hours from morning , when pencroft , then sound asleep , was vigorously shaken .
" what 's the matter ? " he cried , rousing himself , and collecting his ideas with the promptitude usual to seamen .
the reporter was leaning over him , and saying,--
" listen , pencroft , listen ! "
the sailor strained his ears , but could hear no noise beyond those caused by the storm .
" no , " replied gideon spilett , listening again , " i thought i heard-- "
" what ? "
" the barking of a dog ! "
" a dog ! " cried pencroft , springing up .
" yes -- barking-- "
" it 's not possible ! " replied the sailor .
" and besides , how , in the roaring of the storm-- "
" stop -- listen-- " said the reporter .
pencroft listened more attentively , and really thought he heard , during a lull , distant barking .
" well ! " said the reporter , pressing the sailor 's hand .
" yes -- yes ! " replied pencroft .
" it is top !
it is top ! " cried herbert , who had just awoke ; and all three rushed towards the opening of the chimneys .
the darkness was intense .
the sea , the sky , the land were all mingled in one black mass .
not a speck of light was visible .
the reporter and his companions remained thus for a few minutes , overwhelmed by the wind , drenched by the rain , blinded by the sand .
then , in a pause of the tumult , they again heard the barking , which they found must be at some distance .
he was most probably alone , for , if neb had been with him , he would have made his way more directly towards the chimneys .
the sailor squeezed the reporter 's hand , for he could not make himself heard , in a way which signified " wait ! " then he reentered the passage .
an instant after he issued with a lighted fagot , which he threw into the darkness , whistling shrilly .
it appeared as if this signal had been waited for ; the barking immediately came nearer , and soon a dog bounded into the passage .
pencroft , herbert , and spilett entered after him .
" it is top ! " cried herbert .
it was indeed top , a magnificent anglo - norman , who derived from these two races crossed the swiftness of foot and the acuteness of smell which are the preeminent qualities of coursing dogs .
it was the dog of the engineer , cyrus harding .
but he was alone !
neither neb nor his master accompanied him !
how was it that his instinct had guided him straight to the chimneys , which he did not know ?
it appeared inexplicable , above all , in the midst of this black night and in such a tempest !
but what was still more inexplicable was , that top was neither tired , nor exhausted , nor even soiled with mud or sand!--herbert had drawn him towards him , and was patting his head , the dog rubbing his neck against the lad 's hands .
" if the dog is found , the master will be found also ! " said the reporter .
" god grant it ! " responded herbert .
" let us set off !
top will guide us ! "
the storm was then in all its violence , and perhaps at its height .
the reporter and herbert walked behind the dog , and the sailor brought up the rear .
it was impossible to exchange a word .
in short , they sometimes went faster than they liked , and had some difficulty in keeping their feet ; but hope gave them strength , for it was not at random that they made their way along the shore .
they had no doubt that neb had found his master , and that he had sent them the faithful dog .
but was the engineer living , or had neb only sent for his companions that they might render the last duties to the corpse of the unfortunate harding ?
the turn of the rocks sheltered them from the wind , and they could breathe after this walk or rather run of a quarter of an hour .
they could now hear and reply to each other , and the lad having pronounced the name of cyrus harding , top gave a few short barks , as much as to say that his master was saved .
" saved , is n't he ? " repeated herbert ; " saved , top ? "
and the dog barked in reply .
great billows thundered against the reef with such violence that they probably passed entirely over the islet , then quite invisible .
the mole no longer protected the coast , which was directly exposed to the attacks of the open sea .
as soon as the sailor and his companions left the precipice , the wind struck them again with renewed fury .
though bent under the gale they walked very quickly , following top , who did not hesitate as to what direction to take .
at four o'clock in the morning , they reckoned that they had cleared about five miles .
the clouds were slightly raised , and the wind , though less damp , was very sharp and cold .
insufficiently protected by their clothing , pencroft , herbert and spilett suffered cruelly , but not a complaint escaped their lips .
they were determined to follow top , wherever the intelligent animal wished to lead them .
towards five o'clock day began to break .
at the same time on the left the hilly parts of the coast could be seen , though very indistinctly .
at six o'clock day had broken .
on the left , the country appeared to be one vast extent of sandy downs , bristling with thistles .
there was no cliff , and the shore offered no resistance to the ocean but a chain of irregular hillocks .
at this moment , top became very excited .
he ran forward , then returned , and seemed to entreat them to hasten their steps .
the dog then left the beach , and guided by his wonderful instinct , without showing the least hesitation , went straight in among the downs .
they followed him .
the country appeared an absolute desert .
the downs , the extent of which was large , were composed of hillocks and even of hills , very irregularly distributed .
they resembled a switzerland modeled in sand , and only an amazing instinct could have possibly recognized the way .
five minutes after having left the beach , the reporter and his two companions arrived at a sort of excavation , hollowed out at the back of a high mound .
there top stopped , and gave a loud , clear bark .
spilett , herbert , and pencroft dashed into the cave .
neb was there , kneeling beside a body extended on a bed of grass .
the body was that of the engineer , cyrus harding .
chapter 8
" living ? " he cried .
neb did not reply .
spilett and the sailor turned pale .
herbert clasped his hands , and remained motionless .
the poor negro , absorbed in his grief , evidently had neither seen his companions nor heard the sailor speak .
the reporter knelt down beside the motionless body , and placed his ear to the engineer 's chest , having first torn open his clothes .
a minute -- an age!--passed , during which he endeavored to catch the faintest throb of the heart .
neb had raised himself a little and gazed without seeing .
despair had completely changed his countenance .
he could scarcely be recognized , exhausted with fatigue , broken with grief .
he believed his master was dead .
gideon spilett at last rose , after a long and attentive examination .
" he lives ! " said he .
the lad was obliged to content himself with dipping his handkerchief in the stream , and with it hastened back to the grotto .
happily the wet handkerchief was enough for gideon spilett , who only wished to wet the engineer 's lips .
the cold water produced an almost immediate effect .
" we will save him ! " exclaimed the reporter .
but the explanation would come later .
when cyrus was able to speak he would say what had happened .
he was sinking from exhaustion , and certainly , had not the reporter and his companions arrived , it would have been all over with cyrus harding .
" you thought your master was dead , did n't you ? " said the seaman to neb .
" yes ! quite dead ! " replied neb , " and if top had not found you , and brought you here , i should have buried my master , and then have lain down on his grave to die ! "
it had indeed been a narrow escape for cyrus harding !
neb then recounted what had happened .
the day before , after having left the chimneys at daybreak , he had ascended the coast in a northerly direction , and had reached that part of the shore which he had already visited .
he sought long in vain .
this desert coast appeared never to have been visited by a human creature .
when a corpse floats a little distance from a low shore , it rarely happens that the tide does not throw it up , sooner or later .
this neb knew , and he wished to see his master again for the last time .
" footprints ? " exclaimed pencroft .
" yes ! " replied neb .
" did these footprints begin at the water 's edge ? " asked the reporter .
" no , " replied neb , " only above high - water mark , for the others must have been washed out by the tide . "
" go on , neb , " said spilett .
" i went half crazy when i saw these footprints .
they were very clear and went towards the downs .
i followed them for a quarter of a mile , running , but taking care not to destroy them .
five minutes after , as it was getting dark , i heard the barking of a dog .
it was top , and top brought me here , to my master ! "
now that he had found him dead he longed for him to be alive .
nothing remained to be done but to render the last duties to the one whom he had loved so much !
neb then thought of his companions .
they , no doubt , would wish to see the unfortunate man again .
could he not rely on the sagacity of the faithful animal ?
we have heard how , guided by an instinct which might be looked upon almost as supernatural , top had found them .
neb 's companions had listened with great attention to this account .
" so , neb , " said the reporter , " it was not you who brought your master to this place . "
" no , it was not i , " replied the negro .
" it 's very clear that the captain came here by himself , " said pencroft .
" it is clear in reality , " observed spilett , " but it is not credible ! "
the explanation of this fact could only be produced from the engineer 's own lips , and they must wait for that till speech returned .
neb , who was bending over him , spoke , but the engineer did not appear to hear , and his eyes remained closed .
life was only exhibited in him by movement , his senses had not as yet been restored .
pencroft much regretted not having either fire , or the means of procuring it , for he had , unfortunately , forgotten to bring the burnt linen , which would easily have ignited from the sparks produced by striking together two flints .
as to the engineer 's pockets , they were entirely empty , except that of his waistcoat , which contained his watch .
it was necessary to carry harding to the chimneys , and that as soon as possible .
this was the opinion of all .
meanwhile , the care which was lavished on the engineer brought him back to consciousness sooner than they could have expected .
the water with which they wetted his lips revived him gradually .
pencroft also thought of mixing with the water some moisture from the titra 's flesh which he had brought .
neb and the reporter were leaning over him .
" my master ! my master ! " cried neb .
the engineer heard him .
he recognized neb and spilett , then his other two companions , and his hand slightly pressed theirs .
" island or continent ? " he murmured .
" bother the continent , " cried pencroft hastily ; " there is time enough to see about that , captain ! we do n't care for anything , provided you are living . "
the engineer nodded faintly , and then appeased to sleep .
they respected this sleep , and the reporter began immediately to make arrangements for transporting harding to a more comfortable place .
neb , herbert , and pencroft left the cave and directed their steps towards a high mound crowned with a few distorted trees .
on the way the sailor could not help repeating,--
" island or continent !
to think of that , when at one 's last gasp ! what a man ! "
arrived at the summit of the mound , pencroft and his two companions set to work , with no other tools than their hands , to despoil of its principal branches a rather sickly tree , a sort of marine fir ; with these branches they made a litter , on which , covered with grass and leaves , they could carry the engineer .
the engineer was just awaking from the sleep , or rather from the drowsiness , in which they had found him .
" can you listen to me without fatigue , cyrus ? " asked the reporter .
" yes , " replied the engineer .
" it 's my opinion , " said the sailor , " that captain harding will be able to listen to you still better , if he will have some more grouse jelly,--for we have grouse , captain , " added he , presenting him with a little of this jelly , to which he this time added some of the flesh .
cyrus harding ate a little of the grouse , and the rest was divided among his companions , who found it but a meager breakfast , for they were suffering extremely from hunger .
" well ! " said the sailor , " there is plenty of food at the chimneys , for you must know , captain , that down there , in the south , we have a house , with rooms , beds , and fireplace , and in the pantry , several dozen of birds , which our herbert calls couroucous .
your litter is ready , and as soon as you feel strong enough we will carry you home . "
" thanks , my friend , " replied the engineer ; " wait another hour or two , and then we will set out .
and now speak , spilett . "
the reporter then told him all that had occurred .
he recounted all the events with which cyrus was unacquainted , the last fall of the balloon , the landing on this unknown land , which appeared a desert ( whatever it was , whether island or continent ) , the discovery of the chimneys , the search for him , not forgetting of course neb 's devotion , the intelligence exhibited by the faithful top , as well as many other matters .
" but , " asked harding , in a still feeble voice , " you did not , then , pick me up on the beach ? "
" no , " replied the reporter .
" and did you not bring me to this cave ? "
" no . "
" at what distance is this cave from the sea ? "
" about a mile , " replied pencroft ; " and if you are astonished , captain , we are not less surprised ourselves at seeing you in this place ! "
" indeed , " said the engineer , who was recovering gradually , and who took great interest in these details , " indeed it is very singular ! "
" but , " resumed the sailor , " can you tell us what happened after you were carried off by the sea ? "
cyrus harding considered .
he knew very little .
the wave had torn him from the balloon net .
on returning to the surface , in the half light , he felt a living creature struggling near him .
it was top , who had sprung to his help .
he saw nothing of the balloon , which , lightened both of his weight and that of the dog , had darted away like an arrow .
there he was , in the midst of the angry sea , at a distance which could not be less than half a mile from the shore .
from that moment to the moment in which he recovered to find himself in the arms of his friends he remembered nothing .
" however , " remarked pencroft , " you must have been thrown on to the beach , and you must have had strength to walk here , since neb found your footmarks ! "
" you are right , my dear spilett .
tell me , neb , " added the engineer , turning to his servant , " it was not you who ... you ca n't have had a moment of unconsciousness ... during which no , that 's absurd ....
do any of the footsteps still remain ? " asked harding .
" yes , master , " replied neb ; " here , at the entrance , at the back of the mound , in a place sheltered from the rain and wind .
the storm has destroyed the others . "
" pencroft , " said cyrus harding , " will you take my shoe and see if it fits exactly to the footprints ? "
the sailor did as the engineer requested .
while he and herbert , guided by neb , went to the place where the footprints were to be found , cyrus remarked to the reporter,--
" it is a most extraordinary thing ! "
" perfectly inexplicable ! " replied gideon spilett .
" but do not dwell upon it just now , my dear spilett , we will talk about it by - and - by . "
a moment after the others entered .
there was no doubt about it .
the engineer 's shoe fitted exactly to the footmarks .
it was therefore cyrus harding who had left them on the sand .
" come , " said he , " i must have experienced this unconsciousness which i attributed to neb .
i must have walked like a somnambulist , without any knowledge of my steps , and top must have guided me here , after having dragged me from the waves ...
come , top !
come , old dog ! "
the magnificent animal bounded barking to his master , and caresses were lavished on him .
it was agreed that there was no other way of accounting for the rescue of cyrus harding , and that top deserved all the honor of the affair .
towards twelve o'clock , pencroft having asked the engineer if they could now remove him , harding , instead of replying , and by an effort which exhibited the most energetic will , got up .
but he was obliged to lean on the sailor , or he would have fallen .
" well done ! " cried pencroft ; " bring the captain 's litter . "
the litter was brought ; the transverse branches had been covered with leaves and long grass .
harding was laid on it , and pencroft , having taken his place at one end and neb at the other , they started towards the coast .
there was a distance of eight miles to be accomplished ; but , as they could not go fast , and it would perhaps be necessary to stop frequently , they reckoned that it would take at least six hours to reach the chimneys .
the wind was still strong , but fortunately it did not rain .
however , after traveling for two hours , fatigue overcame him , and he slept .
pencroft , to his extreme surprise , found that the terrible storm had quite altered the aspect of the place .
important changes had occurred ; great blocks of stone lay on the beach , which was also covered with a thick carpet of sea - weed , algae , and wrack .
evidently the sea , passing over the islet , had been carried right up to the foot of the enormous curtain of granite .
the soil in front of the cave had been torn away by the violence of the waves .
a horrid presentiment flashed across pencroft 's mind .
he rushed into the passage , but returned almost immediately , and stood motionless , staring at his companions ....
the fire was out ; the drowned cinders were nothing but mud ; the burnt linen , which was to have served as tinder , had disappeared !
the sea had penetrated to the end of the passages , and everything was overthrown and destroyed in the interior of the chimneys !
chapter 9
in a few words , gideon spilett , herbert , and neb were made acquainted with what had happened .
this accident , which appeared so very serious to pencroft , produced different effects on the companions of the honest sailor .
neb , in his delight at having found his master , did not listen , or rather , did not care to trouble himself with what pencroft was saying .
herbert shared in some degree the sailor 's feelings .
as to the reporter , he simply replied,--
" upon my word , pencroft , it 's perfectly indifferent to me ! "
" but , i repeat , that we have n't any fire ! "
" pooh ! "
" nor any means of relighting it ! "
" nonsense ! "
" but i say , mr . spilett-- "
" is n't cyrus here ? " replied the reporter .
" is not our engineer alive ?
he will soon find some way of making fire for us ! "
" with what ? "
" with nothing . "
what had pencroft to say ?
he could say nothing , for , in the bottom of his heart he shared the confidence which his companions had in cyrus harding .
the engineer was to them a microcosm , a compound of every science , a possessor of all human knowledge .
it was better to be with cyrus in a desert island , than without him in the most flourishing town in the united states .
with him they could want nothing ; with him they would never despair .
if these brave men had been told that a volcanic eruption would destroy the land , that this land would be engulfed in the depths of the pacific , they would have imperturbably replied,--
" cyrus is here ! "
the supper must necessarily be very meager .
in fact , all the grouse flesh had been consumed , and there no longer existed any means of cooking more game .
besides , the couroucous which had been reserved had disappeared .
first of all , cyrus harding was carried into the central passage .
there they managed to arrange for him a couch of sea - weed which still remained almost dry .
night had closed in , and the temperature , which had modified when the wind shifted to the northwest , again became extremely cold .
also , the sea having destroyed the partitions which pencroft had put up in certain places in the passages , the chimneys , on account of the draughts , had become scarcely habitable .
the engineer 's condition would , therefore , have been bad enough , if his companions had not carefully covered him with their coats and waistcoats .
supper , this evening , was of course composed of the inevitable lithodomes , of which herbert and neb picked up a plentiful supply on the beach .
however , to these molluscs , the lad added some edible sea - weed , which he gathered on high rocks , whose sides were only washed by the sea at the time of high tides .
this sea - weed , which belongs to the order of fucacae , of the genus sargassum , produces , when dry , a gelatinous matter , rich and nutritious .
meanwhile the cold became very severe , and unhappily they had no means of defending themselves from it .
the sailor , extremely vexed , tried in all sorts of ways to procure fire .
he found some dry moss , and by striking together two pebbles he obtained some sparks , but the moss , not being inflammable enough , did not take fire , for the sparks were really only incandescent , and not at all of the same consistency as those which are emitted from flint when struck in the same manner .
the experiment , therefore , did not succeed .
pencroft , although he had no confidence in the proceeding , then tried rubbing two pieces of dry wood together , as savages do .
certainly , the movement which he and neb exhibited , if it had been transformed into heat , according to the new theory , would have been enough to heat the boiler of a steamer !
it came to nothing .
the bits of wood became hot , to be sure , but much less so than the operators themselves .
after working an hour , pencroft , who was in a complete state of perspiration , threw down the pieces of wood in disgust .
" i can never be made to believe that savages light their fires in this way , let them say what they will , " he exclaimed .
" i could sooner light my arms by rubbing them against each other ! "
the sailor was wrong to despise the proceeding .
pencroft 's ill humor did not last long .
herbert had taken the bits of wood which he had turned down , and was exerting himself to rub them .
the hardy sailor could not restrain a burst of laughter on seeing the efforts of the lad to succeed where he had failed .
" rub , my boy , rub ! " said he .
this soon happened .
however , they were obliged to give up , for this night at least , the attempt to procure fire .
herbert , neb , and pencroft did the same , while top slept at his master 's feet .
next day , the 28th of march , when the engineer awoke , about eight in the morning , he saw his companions around him watching his sleep , and , as on the day before , his first words were:--
" island or continent ? "
this was his uppermost thought .
" you do n't know yet ? "
" but we shall know , " rejoined pencroft , " when you have guided us into the country . "
" that 's capital ! " cried the sailor .
" i feel dreadfully weak , " replied harding .
" give me something to eat , my friends , and it will soon go off . you have fire , have n't you ? "
this question was not immediately replied to .
but , in a few seconds--
" alas ! we have no fire , " said pencroft , " or rather , captain , we have it no longer ! "
" we shall consider , " replied the engineer , " and if we do not find some substance similar to tinder-- "
" well ? " asked the sailor .
" well , we will make matches .
" chemicals ? "
" chemicals ! "
" it is not more difficult than that , " cried the reporter , striking the sailor on the shoulder .
the latter did not think it so simple , but he did not protest .
all went out .
having thrown a rapid glance around him , the engineer seated himself on a block of stone .
herbert offered him a few handfuls of shell - fish and sargassum , saying,--
" thanks , my boy , " replied harding ; " it will do -- for this morning at least . "
he ate the wretched food with appetite , and washed it down with a little fresh water , drawn from the river in an immense shell .
his companions looked at him without speaking .
then , feeling somewhat refreshed , cyrus harding crossed his arms , and said,--
" so , my friends , you do not know yet whether fate has thrown us on an island , or on a continent ? "
" no , captain , " replied the boy .
" we shall know to - morrow , " said the engineer ; " till then , there is nothing to be done . "
" yes , " replied pencroft .
" what ? "
" fire , " said the sailor , who , also , had a fixed idea .
" we will make it , pencroft , " replied harding . " while you were carrying me yesterday , did i not see in the west a mountain which commands the country ? "
" yes , " replied spilett , " a mountain which must be rather high-- "
" well , " replied the engineer , " we will climb to the summit to - morrow , and then we shall see if this land is an island or a continent .
till then , i repeat , there is nothing to be done . "
" yes , fire ! " said the obstinate sailor again .
the seaman looked at spilett in a way which seemed to say , " if it depended upon you to do it , we would n't taste roast meat very soon " ; but he was silent .
meanwhile captain harding had made no reply .
he appeared to be very little troubled by the question of fire .
for a few minutes he remained absorbed in thought ; then again speaking,--
" my friends , " said he , " our situation is , perhaps , deplorable ; but , at any rate , it is very plain .
" certainly , nothing could be plainer , " replied pencroft .
" but , whether it is an island or a continent , " asked gideon spilett , " whereabouts do you think , cyrus , this storm has thrown us ? "
" i can not say exactly , " replied the engineer , " but i presume it is some land in the pacific .
in fact , when we left richmond , the wind was blowing from the northeast , and its very violence greatly proves that it could not have varied .
if the direction has been maintained from the northeast to the southwest , we have traversed the states of north carolina , of south carolina , of georgia , the gulf of mexico , mexico , itself , in its narrow part , then a part of the pacific ocean .
i can not estimate the distance traversed by the balloon at less than six to seven thousand miles , and , even supposing that the wind had varied half a quarter , it must have brought us either to the archipelago of mendava , either on the pomotous , or even , if it had a greater strength than i suppose , to the land of new zealand .
if the last hypothesis is correct , it will be easy enough to get home again .
" never ? " cried the reporter .
" you say ' never , ' my dear cyrus ? "
" better to put things at the worst at first , " replied the engineer , " and reserve the best for a surprise . "
" well said , " remarked pencroft .
" it is to be hoped , too , that this island , if it be one , is not situated just out of the course of ships ; that would be really unlucky ! "
" we shall not know what we have to rely on until we have first made the ascent of the mountain , " replied the engineer .
" but to - morrow , captain , " asked herbert , " shall you be in a state to bear the fatigue of the ascent ? "
" i hope so , " replied the engineer , " provided you and pencroft , my boy , show yourselves quick and clever hunters . "
" captain , " said the sailor , " since you are speaking of game , if on my return , i was as certain of roasting it as i am of bringing it back-- "
" bring it back all the same , pencroft , " replied harding .
it was then agreed that the engineer and the reporter were to pass the day at the chimneys , so as to examine the shore and the upper plateau .
neb , herbert , and the sailor were to return to the forest , renew their store of wood , and lay violent hands on every creature , feathered or hairy , which might come within their reach .
they set out accordingly about ten o'clock in the morning , herbert confident , neb joyous , pencroft murmuring aside,--
" if , on my return , i find a fire at the house , i shall believe that the thunder itself came to light it . "
all three climbed the bank ; and arrived at the angle made by the river , the sailor , stopping , said to his two companions,--
" shall we begin by being hunters or wood - men ? "
" hunters , " replied herbert .
" we will hunt , then , " said the sailor , " and afterwards we can come back and collect our wood . "
this agreed to , herbert , neb , and pencroft , after having torn three sticks from the trunk of a young fir , followed top , who was bounding about among the long grass .
this time , the hunters , instead of following the course of the river , plunged straight into the heart of the forest .
there were still the same trees , belonging , for the most part , to the pine family .
in certain places , less crowded , growing in clumps , these pines exhibited considerable dimensions , and appeared to indicate , by their development , that the country was situated in a higher latitude than the engineer had supposed .
glades , bristling with stumps worn away by time , were covered with dry wood , which formed an inexhaustible store of fuel .
then , the glade passed , the underwood thickened again , and became almost impenetrable .
it was difficult enough to find the way among the groups of trees , without any beaten track .
so the sailor from time to time broke off branches which might be easily recognized .
top , running under the branches , only roused birds which could not be approached .
even the couroucous were invisible , and it was probable that the sailor would be obliged to return to the marshy part of the forest , in which he had so happily performed his grouse fishing .
" have patience , " replied the sailor , " it is n't the game which will be wanting on our return . "
" have you not confidence in captain harding ? "
" yes . "
" but you do n't believe that he will make fire ? "
" i shall believe it when the wood is blazing in the fireplace . "
" it will blaze , since my master has said so . "
" we shall see ! "
meanwhile , the sun had not reached the highest point in its course above the horizon .
the exploration , therefore , continued , and was usefully marked by a discovery which herbert made of a tree whose fruit was edible .
this was the stone - pine , which produces an excellent almond , very much esteemed in the temperate regions of america and europe .
these almonds were in a perfect state of maturity , and herbert described them to his companions , who feasted on them .
" come , " said pencroft , " sea - weed by way of bread , raw mussels for meat , and almonds for dessert , that 's certainly a good dinner for those who have not a single match in their pocket ! "
" we must n't complain , " said herbert .
" i am not complaining , my boy , " replied pencroft , " only i repeat , that meat is a little too much economized in this sort of meal . "
" top has found something ! " cried neb , who ran towards a thicket , in the midst of which the dog had disappeared , barking .
with top 's barking were mingled curious gruntings .
the sailor and herbert had followed neb .
the hunters had scarcely entered the bushes when they saw top engaged in a struggle with an animal which he was holding by the ear .
this quadruped was a sort of pig nearly two feet and a half long , of a blackish brown color , lighter below , having hard scanty hair ; its toes , then strongly fixed in the ground , seemed to be united by a membrane .
herbert recognized in this animal the capybara , that is to say , one of the largest members of the rodent order .
meanwhile , the capybara did not struggle against the dog .
it stupidly rolled its eyes , deeply buried in a thick bed of fat .
perhaps it saw men for the first time .
however , neb having tightened his grasp on his stick , was just going to fell the pig , when the latter , tearing itself from top 's teeth , by which it was only held by the tip of its ear , uttered a vigorous grunt , rushed upon herbert , almost overthrew him , and disappeared in the wood .
" the rascal ! " cried pencroft .
all three directly darted after top , but at the moment when they joined him the animal had disappeared under the waters of a large pond shaded by venerable pines .
neb , herbert , and pencroft stopped , motionless .
top plunged into the water , but the capybara , hidden at the bottom of the pond , did not appear .
" let us wait , " said the boy , " for he will soon come to the surface to breathe . "
" wo n't he drown ? " asked neb .
" no , " replied herbert , " since he has webbed feet , and is almost an amphibious animal .
but watch him . "
top remained in the water .
pencroft and his two companions went to different parts of the bank , so as to cut off the retreat of the capybara , which the dog was looking for beneath the water .
herbert was not mistaken .
in a few minutes the animal appeared on the surface of the water .
top was upon it in a bound , and kept it from plunging again .
an instant later the capybara , dragged to the bank , was killed by a blow from neb 's stick .
" hurrah ! " cried pencroft , who was always ready with this cry of triumph .
" give me but a good fire , and this pig shall be gnawed to the bones ! "
pencroft hoisted the capybara on his shoulders , and judging by the height of the sun that it was about two o'clock , he gave the signal to return .
top 's instinct was useful to the hunters , who , thanks to the intelligent animal , were enabled to discover the road by which they had come .
half an hour later they arrived at the river .
pencroft soon made a raft of wood , as he had done before , though if there was no fire it would be a useless task , and the raft following the current , they returned towards the chimneys .
but the sailor had not gone fifty paces when he stopped , and again uttering a tremendous hurrah , pointed towards the angle of the cliff,--
" herbert !
neb !
look ! " he shouted .
smoke was escaping and curling up among the rocks .
chapter 10
in a few minutes the three hunters were before a crackling fire .
the captain and the reporter were there .
pencroft looked from one to the other , his capybara in his hand , without saying a word .
" well , yes , my brave fellow , " cried the reporter .
" the sun ! "
gideon spilett was quite right in his reply .
it was the sun which had furnished the heat which so astonished pencroft .
the sailor could scarcely believe his eyes , and he was so amazed that he did not think of questioning the engineer .
" had you a burning - glass , sir ? " asked herbert of harding .
" no , my boy , " replied he , " but i made one . "
and he showed the apparatus which served for a burning - glass .
it was simply two glasses which he had taken from his own and the reporter 's watches .
having filled them with water and rendered their edges adhesive by means of a little clay , he thus fabricated a regular burning - glass , which , concentrating the solar rays on some very dry moss , soon caused it to blaze .
the sailor considered the apparatus ; then he gazed at the engineer without saying a word , only a look plainly expressed his opinion that if cyrus harding was not a magician , he was certainly no ordinary man .
at last speech returned to him , and he cried,--
" note that , mr . spilett , note that down on your paper ! "
" it is noted , " replied the reporter .
then , neb helping him , the seaman arranged the spit , and the capybara , properly cleaned , was soon roasting like a suckling - pig before a clear , crackling fire .
the chimneys had again become more habitable , not only because the passages were warmed by the fire , but because the partitions of wood and mud had been re - established .
it was evident that the engineer and his companions had employed their day well .
cyrus harding had almost entirely recovered his strength , and had proved it by climbing to the upper plateau .
from this point his eye , accustomed to estimate heights and distances , was fixed for a long time on the cone , the summit of which he wished to reach the next day .
therefore it was probable that harding could easily solve the question of " island or continent , " to which he attached so much importance .
they supped capitally .
he was preoccupied with projects for the next day .
once or twice pencroft gave forth some ideas upon what it would be best to do ; but cyrus harding , who was evidently of a methodical mind , only shook his head without uttering a word .
" to - morrow , " he repeated , " we shall know what we have to depend upon , and we will act accordingly . "
the meal ended , fresh armfuls of wood were thrown on the fire , and the inhabitants of the chimneys , including the faithful top , were soon buried in a deep sleep .
no incident disturbed this peaceful night , and the next day , the 29th of march , fresh and active they awoke , ready to undertake the excursion which must determine their fate .
all was ready for the start .
the remains of the capybara would be enough to sustain harding and his companions for at least twenty - four hours .
besides , they hoped to find more food on the way .
as the glasses had been returned to the watches of the engineer and reporter , pencroft burned a little linen to serve as tinder .
as to flint , that would not be wanting in these regions of plutonic origin .
it was half - past seven in the morning when the explorers , armed with sticks , left the chimneys .
following pencroft 's advice , it appeared best to take the road already traversed through the forest , and to return by another route .
it was also the most direct way to reach the mountain .
they turned the south angle and followed the left bank of the river , which was abandoned at the point where it formed an elbow towards the southwest .
the path , already trodden under the evergreen trees , was found , and at nine o'clock cyrus harding and his companions had reached the western border of the forest .
the ground , till then , very little undulated , boggy at first , dry and sandy afterwards , had a gentle slope , which ascended from the shore towards the interior of the country .
a few very timid animals were seen under the forest - trees .
top quickly started them , but his master soon called him back , for the time had not come to commence hunting ; that would be attended to later .
the engineer was not a man who would allow himself to be diverted from his fixed idea .
at ten o'clock a halt of a few minutes was made .
on leaving the forest , the mountain system of the country appeared before the explorers .
the mountain was composed of two cones ; the first , truncated at a height of about two thousand five hundred feet , was sustained by buttresses , which appeared to branch out like the talons of an immense claw set on the ground .
between these were narrow valleys , bristling with trees , the last clumps of which rose to the top of the lowest cone .
there appeared to be less vegetation on that side of the mountain which was exposed to the northeast , and deep fissures could be seen which , no doubt , were watercourses .
on the first cone rested a second , slightly rounded , and placed a little on one side , like a great round hat cocked over the ear .
it appeared formed of bare earth , here and there pierced by reddish rocks .
they wished to reach the second cone , and proceeding along the ridge of the spurs seemed to be the best way by which to gain it .
" we are on volcanic ground , " cyrus harding had said , and his companions following him began to ascend by degrees on the back of a spur , which , by a winding and consequently more accessible path , joined the first plateau .
the ground had evidently been convulsed by subterranean force .
during the first part of the ascent , herbert remarked on the footprints which indicated the recent passage of large animals .
" perhaps these beasts will not let us pass by willingly , " said pencroft .
" well , " replied the reporter , who had already hunted the tiger in india , and the lion in africa , " we shall soon learn how successfully to encounter them .
sometimes , too , the ground suddenly fell , and they found themselves on the edge of a deep chasm which they had to go round .
thus , in retracing their steps so as to find some practicable path , much time was employed and fatigue undergone for nothing .
at twelve o'clock , when the small band of adventurers halted for breakfast at the foot of a large group of firs , near a little stream which fell in cascades , they found themselves still half way from the first plateau , which most probably they would not reach till nightfall .
on the left , the sight extended several miles to the north ; but , on the northwest , at the point occupied by the explorers , it was cut short by the ridge of a fantastically - shaped spur , which formed a powerful support of the central cone .
at one o'clock the ascent was continued .
they slanted more towards the southwest and again entered among thick bushes .
there under the shade of the trees fluttered several couples of gallinaceae belonging to the pheasant species .
they were tragopans , ornamented by a pendant skin which hangs over their throats , and by two small , round horns , planted behind the eyes .
among these birds , which were about the size of a fowl , the female was uniformly brown , while the male was gorgeous in his red plumage , decorated with white spots .
gideon spilett , with a stone cleverly and vigorously thrown , killed one of these tragopans , on which pencroft , made hungry by the fresh air , had cast greedy eyes .
after leaving the region of bushes , the party , assisted by resting on each other 's shoulders , climbed for about a hundred feet up a steep acclivity and reached a level place , with very few trees , where the soil appeared volcanic .
it was necessary to ascend by zigzags to make the slope more easy , for it was very steep , and the footing being exceedingly precarious required the greatest caution .
neb and herbert took the lead , pencroft the rear , the captain and the reporter between them .
the animals which frequented these heights -- and there were numerous traces of them -- must necessarily belong to those races of sure foot and supple spine , chamois or goat .
several were seen , but this was not the name pencroft gave them , for all of a sudden--"sheep ! " he shouted .
all stopped about fifty feet from half - a - dozen animals of a large size , with strong horns bent back and flattened towards the point , with a woolly fleece , hidden under long silky hair of a tawny color .
they were not ordinary sheep , but a species usually found in the mountainous regions of the temperate zone , to which herbert gave the name of the musmon .
" have they legs and chops ? " asked the sailor .
" yes , " replied herbert .
" well , then , they are sheep ! " said pencroft .
the animals , motionless among the blocks of basalt , gazed with an astonished eye , as if they saw human bipeds for the first time .
then their fears suddenly aroused , they disappeared , bounding over the rocks .
" good - bye , till we meet again , " cried pencroft , as he watched them , in such a comical tone that cyrus harding , gideon spilett , herbert , and neb could not help laughing .
the ascent was continued .
here and there were traces of lava .
sulphur springs sometimes stopped their way , and they had to go round them .
in approaching the first plateau formed by the truncating of the lower cone , the difficulties of the ascent were very great .
the purity of the sky at the zenith was felt through the transparent air .
a perfect calm reigned around them .
they could not see the sun , then hid by the vast screen of the upper cone , which masked the half - horizon of the west , and whose enormous shadow stretching to the shore increased as the radiant luminary sank in its diurnal course .
vapor -- mist rather than clouds -- began to appear in the east , and assume all the prismatic colors under the influence of the solar rays .
five hundred feet only separated the explorers from the plateau , which they wished to reach so as to establish there an encampment for the night , but these five hundred feet were increased to more than two miles by the zigzags which they had to describe .
the soil , as it were , slid under their feet .
evening came on by degrees , and it was almost night when cyrus harding and his companions , much fatigued by an ascent of seven hours , arrived at the plateau of the first cone .
it was then necessary to prepare an encampment , and to restore their strength by eating first and sleeping afterwards .
this second stage of the mountain rose on a base of rocks , among which it would be easy to find a retreat .
while the sailor was preparing his hearth with stones which he put to this use , neb and herbert occupied themselves with getting a supply of fuel .
their object in lighting a fire was only to enable them to withstand the cold temperature of the night , as it was not employed in cooking the bird , which neb kept for the next day .
the remains of the capybara and some dozens of the stone - pine almonds formed their supper .
it was not half - past six when all was finished .
cyrus harding then thought of exploring in the half - light the large circular layer which supported the upper cone of the mountain .
before taking any rest , he wished to know if it was possible to get round the base of the cone in the case of its sides being too steep and its summit being inaccessible .
this question preoccupied him , for it was possible that from the way the hat inclined , that is to say , towards the north , the plateau was not practicable .
the engineer , accordingly , regardless of fatigue , leaving pencroft and neb to arrange the beds , and gideon spilett to note the incidents of the day , began to follow the edge of the plateau , going towards the north .
the night was beautiful and still , the darkness was not yet deep .
cyrus harding and the boy walked near each other , without speaking .
in some places the plateau opened before them , and they passed without hindrance .
in others , obstructed by rocks , there was only a narrow path , in which two persons could not walk abreast .
after a walk of twenty minutes , cyrus harding and herbert were obliged to stop .
from this point the slope of the two cones became one .
but if the engineer and the boy were obliged to give up thoughts of following a circular direction , in return an opportunity was given for ascending the cone .
hardened lava and crusted scoria formed a sort of natural staircase of large steps , which would greatly facilitate the ascent to the summit of the mountain .
harding took all this in at a glance , and without hesitating , followed by the lad , he entered the enormous chasm in the midst of an increasing obscurity .
there was still a height of a thousand feet to overcome .
would the interior acclivities of the crater be practicable ?
it would soon be seen .
the persevering engineer resolved to continue his ascent until he was stopped .
the atmosphere inside the crater was filled with no sulphurous vapor .
it was more than the sleep of a volcano ; it was its complete extinction .
cyrus harding 's attempt would succeed .
little by little , herbert and he climbing up the sides of the interior , saw the crater widen above their heads .
the radius of this circular portion of the sky , framed by the edge of the cone , increased obviously .
at each step , as it were , that the explorers made , fresh stars entered the field of their vision .
then , as the crater widened , appeared fomalhaut of the fish , the southern triangle , and lastly , nearly at the antarctic pole , the glittering southern cross , which replaces the polar star of the northern hemisphere .
it was nearly eight o'clock when cyrus harding and herbert set foot on the highest ridge of the mountain at the summit of the cone .
it was then perfectly dark , and their gaze could not extend over a radius of two miles .
did the sea surround this unknown land , or was it connected in the west with some continent of the pacific ?
it could not yet be made out .
towards the west , a cloudy belt , clearly visible at the horizon , increased the gloom , and the eye could not discover if the sky and water were blended together in the same circular line .
but at one point of the horizon a vague light suddenly appeared , which descended slowly in proportion as the cloud mounted to the zenith .
it was the slender crescent moon , already almost disappearing ; but its light was sufficient to show clearly the horizontal line , then detached from the cloud , and the engineer could see its reflection trembling for an instant on a liquid surface .
cyrus harding seized the lad 's hand , and in a grave voice,--
" an island ! " said he , at the moment when the lunar crescent disappeared beneath the waves .
chapter 11
half an hour later cyrus harding and herbert had returned to the encampment .
the engineer merely told his companions that the land upon which fate had thrown them was an island , and that the next day they would consult .
then each settled himself as well as he could to sleep , and in that rocky hole , at a height of two thousand five hundred feet above the level of the sea , through a peaceful night , the islanders enjoyed profound repose .
this time his companions followed him in the new exploration .
they also wished to see the island , on the productions of which they must depend for the supply of all their wants .
it was about seven o'clock in the morning when cyrus harding , herbert , pencroft , gideon spilett , and neb quitted the encampment .
they had faith in themselves , doubtless , but it must be observed that the basis of this faith was not the same with harding as with his companions .
pencroft especially , since the incident of the relighted fire , would not have despaired for an instant , even if he was on a bare rock , if the engineer was with him on the rock .
it will be hard if we do n't manage to get away some day or other from a place where certainly no one will detain us ! "
cyrus harding followed the same road as the evening before .
they went round the cone by the plateau which formed the shoulder , to the mouth of the enormous chasm .
the weather was magnificent .
the sun rose in a pure sky and flooded with his rays all the eastern side of the mountain .
the crater was reached .
below the chasm , large thick streaks of lava wound over the sides of the mountain , and thus marked the course of the eruptive matter to the lower valleys which furrowed the northern part of the island .
the interior of the crater , whose inclination did not exceed thirty five to forty degrees , presented no difficulties nor obstacles to the ascent .
traces of very ancient lava were noticed , which probably had overflowed the summit of the cone , before this lateral chasm had opened a new way to it .
before eight o'clock harding and his companions were assembled at the summit of the crater , on a conical mound which swelled the northern edge .
" the sea , the sea everywhere ! " they cried , as if their lips could not restrain the words which made islanders of them .
the sea , indeed , formed an immense circular sheet of water all around them !
no land in sight .
over all this immense space the ocean alone was visible -- the island occupied the center of a circumference which appeared to be infinite .
from the ocean their gaze returned to the island which they commanded entirely , and the first question was put by gideon spilett in these terms : " about what size is this island ? "
truly , it did not appear large in the midst of the immense ocean .
cyrus harding reflected a few minutes ; he attentively observed the perimeter of the island , taking into consideration the height at which he was placed ; then,--
" and consequently an area ? "
" that is difficult to estimate , " replied the engineer , " for it is so uneven . "
if cyrus harding was not mistaken in his calculation , the island had almost the extent of malta or zante , in the mediterranean , but it was at the same time much more irregular and less rich in capes , promontories , points , bays , or creeks .
its strange form caught the eye , and when gideon spilett , on the engineer 's advice , had drawn the outline , they found that it resembled some fantastic animal , a monstrous leviathan , which lay sleeping on the surface of the pacific .
this was in fact the exact shape of the island , which it is of consequence to know , and a tolerably correct map of it was immediately drawn by the reporter .
the east part of the shore , where the castaways had landed , formed a wide bay , terminated by a sharp cape , which had been concealed by a high point from pencroft on his first exploration .
at the northeast two other capes closed the bay , and between them ran a narrow gulf , which looked like the half - open jaws of a formidable dog - fish .
from the northeast to the southwest the coast was rounded , like the flattened cranium of an animal , rising again , forming a sort of protuberance which did not give any particular shape to this part of the island , of which the center was occupied by the volcano .
from this point the shore ran pretty regularly north and south , broken at two - thirds of its perimeter by a narrow creek , from which it ended in a long tail , similar to the caudal appendage of a gigantic alligator .
this tail formed a regular peninsula , which stretched more than thirty miles into the sea , reckoning from the cape southeast of the island , already mentioned ; it curled round , making an open roadstead , which marked out the lower shore of this strangely - formed land .
at the narrowest part , that is to say between the chimneys and the creek on the western shore , which corresponded to it in latitude , the island only measured ten miles ; but its greatest length , from the jaws at the northeast to the extremity of the tail of the southwest , was not less than thirty miles .
as to the interior of the island , its general aspect was this , very woody throughout the southern part from the mountain to the shore , and arid and sandy in the northern part .
between the volcano and the east coast cyrus harding and his companions were surprised to see a lake , bordered with green trees , the existence of which they had not suspected .
seen from this height , the lake appeared to be on the same level as the ocean , but , on reflection , the engineer explained to his companions that the altitude of this little sheet of water must be about three hundred feet , because the plateau , which was its basin , was but a prolongation of the coast .
" is it a freshwater lake ? " asked pencroft .
" certainly , " replied the engineer , " for it must be fed by the water which flows from the mountain . "
" i see a little river which runs into it , " said herbert , pointing out a narrow stream , which evidently took its source somewhere in the west .
" yes , " said harding ; " and since this stream feeds the lake , most probably on the side near the sea there is an outlet by which the surplus water escapes .
we shall see that on our return . "
this little winding watercourse and the river already mentioned constituted the water - system , at least such as it was displayed to the eyes of the explorers .
it might even be inferred that such was the case , so rich did this region appear in the most magnificent specimens of the flora of the temperate zones .
the volcano did not occupy the central part ; it rose , on the contrary , in the northwestern region , and seemed to mark the boundary of the two zones .
at the southwest , at the south , and the southeast , the first part of the spurs were hidden under masses of verdure .
at the north , on the contrary , one could follow their ramifications , which died away on the sandy plains .
cyrus harding and his companions remained an hour at the top of the mountain .
the island was displayed under their eyes , like a plan in relief with different tints , green for the forests , yellow for the sand , blue for the water .
one important question remained to be solved , and the answer would have a great effect upon the future of the castaways .
was the island inhabited ?
it was the reporter who put this question , to which after the close examination they had just made , the answer seemed to be in the negative .
it is true , a distance of nearly thirty miles separated the observers from the extreme points , that is , of the tail which extended to the southwest , and it would have been difficult , even to pencroft 's eyes , to discover a habitation there .
until a more complete exploration , it might be admitted that the island was uninhabited .
but was it frequented , at least occasionally , by the natives of neighboring islands ?
but fifty miles could be easily crossed , either by malay proas or by the large polynesian canoes .
everything depended on the position of the island , of its isolation in the pacific , or of its proximity to archipelagoes .
would cyrus harding be able to find out their latitude and longitude without instruments ?
it would be difficult .
since he was in doubt , it was best to take precautions against a possible descent of neighboring natives .
the exploration of the island was finished , its shape determined , its features made out , its extent calculated , the water and mountain systems ascertained .
but before giving his companions the signal for departure , cyrus harding said to them in a calm , grave voice,--
" here , my friends , is the small corner of land upon which the hand of the almighty has thrown us .
i say by chance , because this is an unimportant island ; there is not even a port in which ships could anchor , and it is to be feared that it is situated out of the route usually followed , that is to say , too much to the south for the ships which frequent the archipelagoes of the pacific , and too much to the north for those which go to australia by doubling cape horn .
i wish to hide nothing of our position from you-- "
" and you are right , my dear cyrus , " replied the reporter , with animation .
" i will obey you in everything , captain , " said herbert , seizing the engineer 's hand .
" my master always , and everywhere ! " cried neb .
" as for me , " said the sailor , " if i ever grumble at work , my name 's not jack pencroft , and if you like , captain , we will make a little america of this island !
only , i ask one thing . "
" what is that ? " said the reporter .
" it is , that we do not consider ourselves castaways , but colonists , who have come here to settle . "
harding could not help smiling , and the sailor 's idea was adopted .
he then thanked his companions , and added , that he would rely on their energy and on the aid of heaven .
" well , now let us set off to the chimneys ! " cried pencroft .
" one minute , my friends , " said the engineer . " it seems to me it would be a good thing to give a name to this island , as well as to , the capes , promontories , and watercourses , which we can see .
" very good , " said the reporter .
" in the future , that will simplify the instructions which we shall have to give and follow . "
" indeed , " said the sailor , " already it is something to be able to say where one is going , and where one has come from .
at least , it looks like somewhere . "
" the chimneys , for example , " said herbert .
" exactly ! " replied pencroft .
" that name was the most convenient , and it came to me quite of myself .
shall we keep the name of the chimneys for our first encampment , captain ? "
" yes , pencroft , since you have so christened it . "
" good ! as for the others , that will be easy , " returned the sailor , who was in high spirits .
" let us give them names , as the robinsons did , whose story herbert has often read to me ; providence bay , whale point , cape disappointment ! "
" or , rather , the names of captain harding , " said herbert , " of mr . spilett , of neb!-- "
" my name ! " cried neb , showing his sparkling white teeth .
" why not ? " replied pencroft .
" port neb , that would do very well !
and cape gideon-- "
" i should prefer borrowing names from our country , " said the reporter , " which would remind us of america . "
" yes , for the principal ones , " then said cyrus harding ; " for those of the bays and seas , i admit it willingly .
we might give to that vast bay on the east the name of union bay , for example ; to that large hollow on the south , washington bay ; to the mountain upon which we are standing , that of mount franklin ; to that lake which is extended under our eyes , that of lake grant ; nothing could be better , my friends .
the shape of the island is so strange that we shall not be troubled to imagine what it resembles .
as to the streams which we do not know as yet , in different parts of the forest which we shall explore later , the creeks which afterwards will be discovered , we can christen them as we find them .
what do you think , my friends ? "
the engineer 's proposal was unanimously agreed to by his companions .
the island was spread out under their eyes like a map , and they had only to give names to all its angles and points .
gideon spilett would write them down , and the geographical nomenclature of the island would be definitely adopted .
first , they named the two bays and the mountain , union bay , washington bay , and mount franklin , as the engineer had suggested .
" now , " said the reporter , " to this peninsula at the southwest of the island , i propose to give the name of serpentine peninsula , and that of reptile - end to the bent tail which terminates it , for it is just like a reptile 's tail . "
" adopted , " said the engineer .
" now , " said herbert , pointing to the other extremity of the island , " let us call this gulf which is so singularly like a pair of open jaws , shark gulf . "
" capital ! " cried pencroft , " and we can complete the resemblance by naming the two parts of the jaws mandible cape . "
" but there are two capes , " observed the reporter .
" well , " replied pencroft , " we can have north mandible cape and south mandible cape . "
" they are inscribed , " said spilett .
" there is only the point at the southeastern extremity of the island to be named , " said pencroft .
" that is , the extremity of union bay ? " asked herbert .
" claw cape , " cried neb directly , who also wished to be godfather to some part of his domain .
in truth , neb had found an excellent name , for this cape was very like the powerful claw of the fantastic animal which this singularly - shaped island represented .
the nomenclature of the visible and known parts of the island was thus finished , and later , they would complete it as they made fresh discoveries .
as to the points of the compass , the engineer had roughly fixed them by the height and position of the sun , which placed union bay and prospect heights to the east .
but the next day , by taking the exact hour of the rising and setting of the sun , and by marking its position between this rising and setting , he reckoned to fix the north of the island exactly , for , in consequence of its situation in the southern hemisphere , the sun , at the precise moment of its culmination , passed in the north and not in the south , as , in its apparent movement , it seems to do , to those places situated in the northern hemisphere .
everything was finished , and the settlers had only to descend mount franklin to return to the chimneys , when pencroft cried out,--
" well ! we are preciously stupid ! "
" why ? " asked gideon spilett , who had closed his notebook and risen to depart .
" why ! our island ! we have forgotten to christen it ! "
herbert was going to propose to give it the engineer 's name and all his companions would have applauded him , when cyrus harding said simply,--
" let us give it the name of a great citizen , my friend ; of him who now struggles to defend the unity of the american republic !
let us call it lincoln island ! "
the engineer 's proposal was replied to by three hurrahs .
and that evening , before sleeping , the new colonists talked of their absent country ; they spoke of the terrible war which stained it with blood ; they could not doubt that the south would soon be subdued , and that the cause of the north , the cause of justice , would triumph , thanks to grant , thanks to lincoln !
now this happened the 30th of march , 1865 . they little knew that sixteen days afterwards a frightful crime would be committed in washington , and that on good friday abraham lincoln would fall by the hand of a fanatic .
chapter 12
pencroft thought it must be breakfast - time , and the watches of the reporter and engineer were therefore consulted to find out the hour .
that of gideon spilett had been preserved from the sea - water , as he had been thrown at once on the sand out of reach of the waves .
it was an instrument of excellent quality , a perfect pocket chronometer , which the reporter had not forgotten to wind up carefully every day .
as to the engineer 's watch , it , of course , had stopped during the time which he had passed on the downs .
the engineer now wound it up , and ascertaining by the height of the sun that it must be about nine o'clock in the morning , he put his watch at that hour .
" no , my dear spilett , wait .
you have kept the richmond time , have you not ? "
" yes , cyrus . "
" consequently , your watch is set by the meridian of that town , which is almost that of washington ? "
" undoubtedly . "
" very well , keep it thus .
content yourself with winding it up very , exactly , but do not touch the hands .
this may be of use to us .
" what will be the good of that ? " thought the sailor .
they ate , and so heartily , that the store of game and almonds was totally exhausted .
but pencroft was not at all uneasy , they would supply themselves on the way .
top , whose share had been very much to his taste , would know how to find some fresh game among the brushwood .
moreover , the sailor thought of simply asking the engineer to manufacture some powder and one or two fowling - pieces ; he supposed there would be no difficulty in that .
on leaving the plateau , the captain proposed to his companions to return to the chimneys by a new way .
he wished to reconnoiter lake grant , so magnificently framed in trees .
they therefore followed the crest of one of the spurs , between which the creek that supplied the lake probably had its source .
in talking , the settlers already employed the names which they had just chosen , which singularly facilitated the exchange of their ideas .
herbert and pencroft -- the one young and the other very boyish -- were enchanted , and while walking , the sailor said ,
" hey , herbert ! how capital it sounds !
it will be impossible to lose ourselves , my boy , since , whether we follow the way to lake grant , or whether we join the mercy through the woods of the far west , we shall be certain to arrive at prospect heights , and , consequently , at union bay ! "
in general , pencroft , herbert , and neb walked first , preceded by top , who poked his nose into every bush .
the reporter and the engineer went together , gideon spilett ready to note every incident , the engineer silent for the most part , and only stepping aside to pick up one thing or another , a mineral or vegetable substance , which he put into his pocket , without making any remark .
" what can he be picking up ? " muttered pencroft .
" i have looked in vain for anything that 's worth the trouble of stooping for . "
towards ten o'clock the little band descended the last declivities of mount franklin .
as yet the ground was scantily strewn with bushes and trees .
they were walking over yellowish calcinated earth , forming a plain of nearly a mile long , which extended to the edge of the wood .
great blocks of that basalt , which , according to bischof , takes three hundred and fifty millions of years to cool , strewed the plain , very confused in some places .
however , there were here no traces of lava , which was spread more particularly over the northern slopes .
cyrus harding expected to reach , without incident , the course of the creek , which he supposed flowed under the trees at the border of the plain , when he saw herbert running hastily back , while neb and the sailor were hiding behind the rocks .
" what 's the matter , my boy ? " asked spilett .
" smoke , " replied herbert .
" we have seen smoke among the rocks , a hundred paces from us . "
" men in this place ? " cried the reporter .
" we must avoid showing ourselves before knowing with whom we have to deal , " replied cyrus harding .
" i trust that there are no natives on this island ; i dread them more than anything else .
where is top ? "
" top is on before . "
" and he does n't bark ? "
" no . "
" that is strange .
however , we must try to call him back . "
in a few moments , the engineer , gideon spilett , and herbert had rejoined their two companions , and like them , they kept out of sight behind the heaps of basalt .
top was recalled by a slight whistle from his master , and the latter , signing to his companions to wait for him , glided away among the rocks .
the colonists , motionless , anxiously awaited the result of this exploration , when a shout from the engineer made them hasten forward .
they soon joined him , and were at once struck with a disagreeable odor which impregnated the atmosphere .
the odor , easily recognized , was enough for the engineer to guess what the smoke was which at first , not without cause , had startled him .
" this fire , " said he , " or rather , this smoke is produced by nature alone .
there is a sulphur spring there , which will cure all our sore throats . "
" captain ! " cried pencroft .
" what a pity that i have n't got a cold ! "
herbert having asked on what he based this calculation,--
the sulphur spring not being of any actual use to the settlers , they proceeded towards the thick border of the forest , which began some hundred paces off .
there , as they had conjectured , the waters of the stream flowed clear and limpid between high banks of red earth , the color of which betrayed the presence of oxide of iron .
from this color , the name of red creek was immediately given to the watercourse .
it was only a large stream , deep and clear , formed of the mountain water , which , half river , half torrent , here rippling peacefully over the sand , there falling against the rocks or dashing down in a cascade , ran towards the lake , over a distance of a mile and a half , its breadth varying from thirty to forty feet .
as to the trees , which some hundred feet downwards shaded the banks of the creek , they belonged , for the most part , to the species which abound in the temperate zone of america and tasmania , and no longer to those coniferae observed in that portion of the island already explored to some miles from prospect heights .
at this time of the year , the commencement of the month of april , which represents the month of october , in this hemisphere , that is , the beginning of autumn , they were still in full leaf .
they consisted principally of casuarinas and eucalypti , some of which next year would yield a sweet manna , similar to the manna of the east .
clumps of australian cedars rose on the sloping banks , which were also covered with the high grass called " tussac " in new holland ; but the cocoanut , so abundant in the archipelagoes of the pacific , seemed to be wanting in the island , the latitude , doubtless , being too low .
" what a pity ! " said herbert , " such a useful tree , and which has such beautiful nuts ! "
suddenly , a strange concert of discordant voices resounded in the midst of a thicket .
the settlers heard successively the song of birds , the cry of quadrupeds , and a sort of clacking which they might have believed to have escaped from the lips of a native .
a few skillful blows from a stick soon put an end to their concert , and procured excellent food for the evening 's dinner .
their insufficiency was still more clearly shown when a troop of quadrupeds , jumping , bounding , making leaps of thirty feet , regular flying mammiferae , fled over the thickets , so quickly and at such a height , that one would have thought that they passed from one tree to another like squirrels .
" kangaroos ! " cried herbert .
" are they good to eat ? " asked pencroft .
" stewed , " replied the reporter , " their flesh is equal to the best venison!-- "
gideon spilett had not finished this exciting sentence when the sailor , followed by neb and herbert , darted on the kangaroos tracks .
top was not more successful than his masters .
" captain , " said pencroft , when the engineer and the reporter had rejoined them , " captain , you see quite well we ca n't get on unless we make a few guns .
will that be possible ? "
" perhaps , " replied the engineer , " but we will begin by first manufacturing some bows and arrows , and i do n't doubt that you will become as clever in the use of them as the australian hunters . "
" bows and arrows ! " said pencroft scornfully .
" that 's all very well for children ! "
" do n't be proud , friend pencroft , " replied the reporter .
" bows and arrows were sufficient for centuries to stain the earth with blood .
powder is but a thing of yesterday , and war is as old as the human race -- unhappily . "
" faith , that 's true , mr . spilett , " replied the sailor , " and i always speak too quickly .
you must excuse me ! "
meanwhile , herbert constant to his favorite science , natural history , reverted to the kangaroos , saying,--
" besides , we had to deal just now with the species which is most difficult to catch .
it is reckoned that there are about a dozen species . "
" herbert , " replied the sailor sententiously , " there is only one species of kangaroos to me , that is ' kangaroo on the spit , ' and it 's just the one we have n't got this evening ! "
they could not help laughing at master pencroft 's new classification .
the honest sailor did not hide his regret at being reduced for dinner to the singing pheasants , but fortune once more showed itself obliging to him .
in fact , top , who felt that his interest was concerned went and ferreted everywhere with an instinct doubled by a ferocious appetite .
it was even probable that if some piece of game did fall into his clutches , none would be left for the hunters , if top was hunting on his own account ; but neb watched him and he did well .
towards three o'clock the dog disappeared in the brushwood and gruntings showed that he was engaged in a struggle with some animal .
neb rushed after him , and soon saw top eagerly devouring a quadruped , which ten seconds later would have been past recognizing in top 's stomach .
but fortunately the dog had fallen upon a brood , and besides the victim he was devouring , two other rodents -- the animals in question belonged to that order -- lay strangled on the turf .
the citizens of the union were at no loss for the right name of these rodents .
they were maras , a sort of agouti , a little larger than their congeners of tropical countries , regular american rabbits , with long ears , jaws armed on each side with five molars , which distinguish the agouti .
the walk , interrupted for an instant , was resumed .
other arborescent species , unknown to the young naturalist , bent over the stream , which could be heard murmuring beneath the bowers of verdure .
meanwhile the stream grew much wider , and cyrus harding supposed that they would soon reach its mouth .
in fact , on emerging from beneath a thick clump of beautiful trees , it suddenly appeared before their eyes .
the explorers had arrived on the western shore of lake grant .
the place was well worth looking at .
this extent of water , of a circumference of nearly seven miles and an area of two hundred and fifty acres , reposed in a border of diversified trees .
numerous aquatic birds frequented the shores of this little ontario , in which the thousand isles of its american namesake were represented by a rock which emerged from its surface , some hundred feet from the southern shore .
there lived in harmony several couples of kingfishers perched on a stone , grave , motionless , watching for fish , then darting down , they plunged in with a sharp cry , and reappeared with their prey in their beaks .
as to the water of the lake , it was sweet , limpid , rather dark , and from certain bubblings , and the concentric circles which crossed each other on the surface , it could not be doubted that it abounded in fish .
" this lake is really beautiful ! " said gideon spilett .
" we could live on its borders ! "
" we will live there ! " replied harding .
the settlers , wishing to return to the chimneys by the shortest way , descended towards the angle formed on the south by the junction of the lake 's bank .
it was not without difficulty that they broke a path through the thickets and brushwood which had never been put aside by the hand of men , and they thus went towards the shore , so as to arrive at the north of prospect heights .
two miles were cleared in this direction , and then , after they had passed the last curtain of trees , appeared the plateau , carpeted with thick turf , and beyond that the infinite sea .
to return to the chimneys , it was enough to cross the plateau obliquely for the space of a mile , and then to descend to the elbow formed by the first detour of the mercy .
but the engineer desired to know how and where the overplus of the water from the lake escaped , and the exploration was prolonged under the trees for a mile and a half towards the north .
it was most probable that an overfall existed somewhere , and doubtless through a cleft in the granite .
this lake was only , in short , an immense center basin , which was filled by degrees by the creek , and its waters must necessarily pass to the sea by some fall .
they continued then to follow the shores of lake grant by climbing the plateau ; but , after having gone a mile in this direction , cyrus harding had not been able to discover the overfall , which , however , must exist somewhere .
it was then half - past four .
in order to prepare for dinner it was necessary that the settlers should return to their dwelling .
the little band retraced their steps , therefore , and by the left bank of the mercy , cyrus harding and his companions arrived at the chimneys .
the fire was lighted , and neb and pencroft , on whom the functions of cooks naturally devolved , to the one in his quality of negro , to the other in that of sailor , quickly prepared some broiled agouti , to which they did great justice .
the repast at length terminated ; at the moment when each one was about to give himself up to sleep , cyrus harding drew from his pocket little specimens of different sorts of minerals , and just said,--
" my friends , this is iron mineral , this a pyrite , this is clay , this is lime , and this is coal . nature gives us these things .
" well , captain , where are we going to begin ? " asked pencroft next morning of the engineer .
" at the beginning , " replied cyrus harding .
and in fact , the settlers were compelled to begin " at the very beginning . "
they did not possess even the tools necessary for making tools , and they were not even in the condition of nature , who , " having time , husbands her strength . "
it must be said , however , that the settlers were " men " in the complete and higher sense of the word .
the engineer harding could not have been seconded by more intelligent companions , nor with more devotion and zeal .
he had tried them .
gideon spilett , a talented reporter , having learned everything so as to be able to speak of everything , would contribute largely with his head and hands to the colonization of the island .
he would not draw back from any task : a determined sportsman , he would make a business of what till then had only been a pleasure to him .
herbert , a gallant boy , already remarkably well informed in the natural sciences , would render greater service to the common cause .
neb was devotion personified .
clever , intelligent , indefatigable , robust , with iron health , he knew a little about the work of the forge , and could not fail to be very useful in the colony .
as to pencroft , he had sailed over every sea , a carpenter in the dockyards in brooklyn , assistant tailor in the vessels of the state , gardener , cultivator , during his holidays , etc . , and like all seamen , fit for anything , he knew how to do everything .
it would have been difficult to unite five men , better fitted to struggle against fate , more certain to triumph over it .
" what is this oven for ? " asked pencroft .
" to make the pottery which we have need of , " replied harding .
" and of what shall we make the oven ? "
" with bricks . "
" and the bricks ? "
" with clay .
let us start , my friends .
to save trouble , we will establish our manufactory at the place of production .
neb will bring provisions , and there will be no lack of fire to cook the food . "
" no , " replied the reporter ; " but if there is a lack of food for want of instruments for the chase ? "
" ah , if we only had a knife ! " cried the sailor .
" well ? " asked cyrus harding .
" yes , a knife , a sharp blade . " said the engineer , as if he was speaking to himself .
at this moment his eyes fell upon top , who was running about on the shore .
the latter took top 's head between his hands , and unfastening the collar which the animal wore round his neck , he broke it in two , saying,-- " there are two knives , pencroft ! "
two hurrahs from the sailor was the reply .
now sandstone was abundant on the beach , and two hours after the stock of tools in the colony consisted of two sharp blades , which were easily fixed in solid handles .
the production of these their first tools was hailed as a triumph .
they therefore followed the bank of the mercy , traversed prospect heights , and after a walk of five miles or more they reached a glade , situated two hundred feet from lake grant .
on the way herbert had discovered a tree , the branches of which the indians of south america employ for making their bows .
it was the crejimba , of the palm family , which does not bear edible fruit .
but pencroft said , that having done his part of the work , chance would do the rest .
the settlers arrived on the ground which had been discovered the day before .
being composed of the sort of clay which is used for making bricks and tiles , it was very useful for the work in question .
generally bricks are formed in molds , but the engineer contented himself with making them by hand .
all that day and the day following were employed in this work .
the clay , soaked in water , was mixed by the feet and hands of the manipulators , and then divided into pieces of equal size .
these quills were fixed firmly at the ends of the arrows , the flight of which was made more certain by some cockatoos ' feathers .
this game was eaten fresh , but they preserved some capybara hams , by smoking them above a fire of green wood , after having perfumed them with sweet - smelling leaves .
however , this food , although very strengthening , was always roast upon roast , and the party would have been delighted to hear some soup bubbling on the hearth , but they must wait till a pot could be made , and , consequently , till the oven was built .
during these excursions , which were not extended far from the brick - field , the hunters could discern the recent passage of animals of a large size , armed with powerful claws , but they could not recognize the species .
cyrus harding advised them to be very careful , as the forest probably enclosed many dangerous beasts .
happily the creature did not attack them , or they might not have escaped without a severe wound .
the chimneys during these few days was not made more comfortable , for the engineer hoped to discover , or build if necessary , a more convenient dwelling .
they contented themselves with spreading moss and dry leaves on the sand of the passages , and on these primitive couches the tired workers slept soundly .
the 5th of april , which was wednesday , was twelve days from the time when the wind threw the castaways on this shore .
naturally this had to be in the open air , and not in a kiln , or rather , the agglomeration of bricks made an enormous kiln , which would bake itself .
the fuel , made of well - prepared fagots , was laid on the ground and surrounded with several rows of dried bricks , which soon formed an enormous cube , to the exterior of which they contrived air - holes .
the work lasted all day , and it was not till the evening that they set fire to the fagots .
no one slept that night , all watching carefully to keep up the fire .
the operation lasted forty - eight hours , and succeeded perfectly .
it then became necessary to leave the smoking mass to cool , and during this time neb and pencroft , guided by cyrus harding , brought , on a hurdle made of interlaced branches , loads of carbonate of lime and common stones , which were very abundant , to the north of the lake .
these stones , when decomposed by heat , made a very strong quicklime , greatly increased by slacking , at least as pure as if it had been produced by the calcination of chalk or marble .
the result of these different works was , that , on the 9th of april , the engineer had at his disposal a quantity of prepared lime and some thousands of bricks .
without losing an instant , therefore , they began the construction of a kiln to bake the pottery , which was indispensable for their domestic use .
they succeeded without much difficulty .
five days after , the kiln was supplied with coal , which the engineer had discovered lying open to the sky towards the mouth of the red creek , and the first smoke escaped from a chimney twenty feet high .
the glade was transformed into a manufactory , and pencroft was not far wrong in believing that from this kiln would issue all the products of modern industry .
in the meantime what the settlers first manufactured was a common pottery in which to cook their food .
" but tobacco will come , like everything else ! " he repeated , in a burst of absolute confidence .
this work lasted till the 15th of april , and the time was well employed .
the settlers , having become potters , made nothing but pottery .
when it suited cyrus harding to change them into smiths , they would become smiths .
but the next day being sunday , and also easter sunday , all agreed to sanctify the day by rest .
these americans were religious men , scrupulous observers of the precepts of the bible , and their situation could not but develop sentiments of confidence towards the author of all things .
on the evening of the 15th of april they returned to the chimneys , carrying with them the pottery , the furnace being extinguished until they could put it to a new use .
their return was marked by a fortunate incident ; the engineer discovered a substance which replaced tinder .
it is known that a spongy , velvety flesh is procured from a certain mushroom of the genus polyporous .
properly prepared , it is extremely inflammable , especially when it has been previously saturated with gunpowder , or boiled in a solution of nitrate or chlorate of potash .
but , till then , they had not found any of these polypores or even any of the morels which could replace them .
on this day , the engineer , seeing a plant belonging to the wormwood genus , the principal species of which are absinthe , balm - mint , tarragon , etc . , gathered several tufts , and , presenting them to the sailor , said,--
" here , pencroft , this will please you . "
pencroft looked attentively at the plant , covered with long silky hair , the leaves being clothed with soft down .
" what 's that , captain ? " asked pencroft .
" is it tobacco ? "
" no , " replied harding , " it is wormwood ; chinese wormwood to the learned , but to us it will be tinder . "
when the wormwood was properly dried it provided them with a very inflammable substance , especially afterwards when the engineer had impregnated it with nitrate of potash , of which the island possessed several beds , and which is in truth saltpeter .
they had an excellent taste , and were very nutritious , being something similar to the substance which is sold in england under the name of " portland sago " ; they were also a good substitute for bread , which the settlers in lincoln island did not yet possess .
when supper was finished , before sleeping , harding and his companions went to take the air on the beach .
it was eight o'clock in the evening ; the night was magnificent .
the moon , which had been full five days before , had not yet risen , but the horizon was already silvered by those soft , pale shades which might be called the dawn of the moon .
at the southern zenith glittered the circumpolar constellations , and above all the southern cross , which some days before the engineer had greeted on the summit of mount franklin .
then , after some minutes thought--
" herbert , " he asked of the lad , " is not this the 15th of april ? "
" yes , captain , " replied herbert .
" well , if i am not mistaken , to - morrow will be one of the four days in the year in which the real time is identical with average time ; that is to say , my boy , that to - morrow , to within some seconds , the sun will pass the meridian just at midday by the clocks .
if the weather is fine i think that i shall obtain the longitude of the island with an approximation of some degrees . "
" without instruments , without sextant ? " asked gideon spilett .
" yes , " replied the engineer .
" also , since the night is clear , i will try , this very evening , to obtain our latitude by calculating the height of the southern cross , that is , from the southern pole above the horizon .
you understand , my friends , that before undertaking the work of installation in earnest it is not enough to have found out that this land is an island ; we must , as nearly as possible , know at what distance it is situated , either from the american continent or australia , or from the principal archipelagoes of the pacific . "
" in fact , " said the reporter , " instead of building a house it would be more important to build a boat , if by chance we are not more than a hundred miles from an inhabited coast . "
" that is why , " returned harding , " i am going to try this evening to calculate the latitude of lincoln island , and to - morrow , at midday , i will try to calculate the longitude . "
if the engineer had possessed a sextant , an apparatus with which the angular distance of objects can be measured with great precision , there would have been no difficulty in the operation .
by the light of the fire he cut two little flat rulers , which he joined together at one end so as to form a pair of compasses , whose legs could separate or come together .
the fastening was fixed with a strong acacia thorn which was found in the wood pile .
this instrument finished , the engineer returned to the beach , but as it was necessary to take the height of the pole from above a clear horizon , that is , a sea horizon , and as claw cape hid the southern horizon , he was obliged to look for a more suitable station .
the best would evidently have been the shore exposed directly to the south ; but the mercy would have to be crossed , and that was a difficulty .
harding resolved , in consequence , to make his observation from prospect heights , taking into consideration its height above the level of the sea -- a height which he intended to calculate next day by a simple process of elementary geometry .
no obstacle intercepted their gaze , which swept the horizon in a semi - circle from the cape to reptile end .
at this moment the southern cross presented itself to the observer in an inverted position , the star alpha marking its base , which is nearer to the southern pole .
this constellation is not situated as near to the antarctic pole as the polar star is to the arctic pole .
the star alpha is about twenty - seven degrees from it , but cyrus harding knew this and made allowance for it in his calculation .
he took care also to observe the moment when it passed the meridian below the pole , which would simplify the operation .
in order to fix the angle obtained , he fastened with thorns the two pieces of wood on a third placed transversely , so that their separation should be properly maintained .
that done , there was only the angle to calculate by bringing back the observation to the level of the sea , taking into consideration the depression of the horizon , which would necessitate measuring the height of the cliff .
the calculations were left for the next day , and at ten o'clock every one was sleeping soundly .
the engineer intended to manufacture soap as soon as he could procure the necessary materials -- soda or potash , fat or oil .
the important question of renewing their wardrobe would be treated of in the proper time and place .
at any rate their clothes would last at least six months longer , for they were strong , and could resist the wear of manual labor .
the sun rising above a clear horizon , announced a magnificent day , one of those beautiful autumn days which are like the last farewells of the warm season .
it was now necessary to complete the observations of the evening before by measuring the height of the cliff above the level of the sea .
" shall you not need an instrument similar to the one which you used yesterday ? " said herbert to the engineer .
" no , my boy , " replied the latter , " we are going to proceed differently , but in as precise a way . "
cyrus harding had provided himself with a straight stick , twelve feet long , which he had measured as exactly as possible by comparing it with his own height , which he knew to a hair .
herbert carried a plumb - line which harding had given him , that is to say , a simple stone fastened to the end of a flexible fiber .
having reached a spot about twenty feet from the edge of the beach , and nearly five hundred feet from the cliff , which rose perpendicularly , harding thrust the pole two feet into the sand , and wedging it up carefully , he managed , by means of the plumb - line , to erect it perpendicularly with the plane of the horizon .
that done , he retired the necessary distance , when , lying on the sand , his eye glanced at the same time at the top of the pole and the crest of the cliff .
he carefully marked the place with a little stick .
then addressing herbert--"do you know the first principles of geometry ? " he asked .
" slightly , captain , " replied herbert , who did not wish to put himself forward .
" you remember what are the properties of two similar triangles ? "
" yes , " replied herbert ; " their homologous sides are proportional . "
" well , my boy , i have just constructed two similar right - angled triangles ; the first , the smallest , has for its sides the perpendicular pole , the distance which separates the little stick from the foot of the pole and my visual ray for hypothenuse ; the second has for its sides the perpendicular cliff , the height of which we wish to measure , the distance which separates the little stick from the bottom of the cliff , and my visual ray also forms its hypothenuse , which proves to be prolongation of that of the first triangle . "
" ah , captain , i understand ! " cried herbert .
" as the distance from the stick to the pole is to the distance from the stick to the base of the cliff , so is the height of the pole to the height of the cliff . "
" just so , herbert , " replied the engineer ; " and when we have measured the two first distances , knowing the height of the pole , we shall only have a sum in proportion to do , which will give us the height of the cliff , and will save us the trouble of measuring it directly . "
the two horizontal distances were found out by means of the pole , whose length above the sand was exactly ten feet .
the first distance was fifteen feet between the stick and the place where the pole was thrust into the sand .
the second distance between the stick and the bottom of the cliff was five hundred feet .
these measurements finished , cyrus harding and the lad returned to the chimneys .
the engineer then took a flat stone which he had brought back from one of his previous excursions , a sort of slate , on which it was easy to trace figures with a sharp shell .
he then proved the following proportions:--
5000 / 15 = 333.3 from which it was proved that the granite cliff measured 333 feet in height .
cyrus harding then took the instrument which he had made the evening before , the space between its two legs giving the angular distance between the star alpha and the horizon .
he measured , very exactly , the opening of this angle on a circumference which he divided into 360 equal parts .
now , this angle by adding to it the twenty - seven degrees which separated alpha from the antarctic pole , and by reducing to the level of the sea the height of the cliff on which the observation had been made , was found to be fifty - three degrees .
cyrus harding concluded , therefore , that lincoln island was situated on the thirty - seventh degree of the southern latitude , or taking into consideration through the imperfection of the performance , an error of five degrees , that it must be situated between the thirty - fifth and the fortieth parallel .
there was only the longitude to be obtained , and the position of the island would be determined , the engineer hoped to attempt this the same day , at twelve o'clock , at which moment the sun would pass the meridian .
at half - past eight the little band was following the edge of the channel .
on the other side , on safety islet , numerous birds were gravely strutting .
they were divers , easily recognized by their cry , which much resembles the braying of a donkey .
pencroft only considered them in an eatable point of view , and learnt with some satisfaction that their flesh , though blackish , is not bad food .
great amphibious creatures could also be seen crawling on the sand ; seals , doubtless , who appeared to have chosen the islet for a place of refuge .
it was impossible to think of those animals in an alimentary point of view , for their oily flesh is detestable ; however , cyrus harding observed them attentively , and without making known his idea , he announced to his companions that very soon they would pay a visit to the islet .
the beach was strewn with innumerable shells , some of which would have rejoiced the heart of a conchologist ; there were , among others , the phasianella , the terebratual , etc .
" neb will not have lost his day , " cried pencroft , looking at the spacious oyster - bed .
" it is really a fortunate discovery , " said the reporter , " and as it is said that each oyster produces yearly from fifty to sixty thousand eggs , we shall have an inexhaustible supply there . "
" no , " replied harding .
" the oyster contains very little nitrogen , and if a man lived exclusively on them , he would have to eat not less than fifteen to sixteen dozen a day . "
" capital ! " replied pencroft .
" we might swallow dozens and dozens without exhausting the bed .
shall we take some for breakfast ? "
and without waiting for a reply to this proposal , knowing that it would be approved of , the sailor and neb detached a quantity of the molluscs .
they put them in a sort of net of hibiscus fiber , which neb had manufactured , and which already contained food ; they then continued to climb the coast between the downs and the sea .
from time to time harding consulted his watch , so as to be prepared in time for the solar observation , which had to be made exactly at midday .
all that part of the island was very barren as far as the point which closed union bay , and which had received the name of cape south mandible .
nothing could be seen there but sand and shells , mingled with debris of lava .
this led the sailor to repeat to the engineer,--
" you see , captain , so long as we have not one or two fowling - pieces , we shall never get anything ! "
" doubtless , pencroft , " replied the reporter , " but it depends on you .
" oh ! " replied the engineer , " we might , no doubt , find all these substances on the island , but a gun is a delicate instrument , and needs very particular tools .
however , we shall see later ! "
" why , " cried pencroft , " were we obliged to throw overboard all the weapons we had with us in the car , all our implements , even our pocket - knives ? "
" but if we had not thrown them away , pencroft , the balloon would have thrown us to the bottom of the sea ! " said herbert .
" what you say is true , my boy , " replied the sailor .
then passing to another idea,--"think , " said he , " how astounded jonathan forster and his companions must have been when , next morning , they found the place empty , and the machine flown away ! "
" i am utterly indifferent about knowing what they may have thought , " said the reporter .
" it was all my idea , that ! " said pencroft , with a satisfied air .
" a splendid idea , pencroft ! " replied gideon spilett , laughing , " and which has placed us where we are . "
" i would rather be here than in the hands of the southerners , " cried the sailor , " especially since the captain has been kind enough to come and join us again . "
" so would i , truly ! " replied the reporter .
" besides , what do we want ?
nothing . "
" if that is not -- everything ! " replied pencroft , laughing and shrugging his shoulders .
" but , some day or other , we shall find means of going away ! "
i have not a map of the pacific , but my memory has preserved a very clear recollection of its southern part .
it has , therefore , to be determined what point in this great space the island occupies , and this the longitude will give us presently , with a sufficient approximation , i hope . "
" is not the archipelago of the pomoutous the nearest point to us in latitude ? " asked herbert .
" yes , " replied the engineer , " but the distance which separates us from it is more than twelve hundred miles . "
" and that way ? " asked neb , who followed the conversation with extreme interest , pointing to the south .
" that way , nothing , " replied pencroft .
" nothing , indeed , " added the engineer .
" well , cyrus , " asked the reporter , " if lincoln island is not more than two or three thousand miles from new zealand or chile ? "
" well , " replied the engineer , " instead of building a house we will build a boat , and master pencroft shall be put in command-- "
" well then , " cried the sailor , " i am quite ready to be captain -- as soon as you can make a craft that 's able to keep at sea ! "
" we shall do it , if it is necessary , " replied cyrus harding .
but while these men , who really hesitated at nothing , were talking , the hour approached at which the observation was to be made .
what cyrus harding was to do to ascertain the passage of the sun at the meridian of the island , without an instrument of any sort , herbert could not guess .
the observers were then about six miles from the chimneys , not far from that part of the downs in which the engineer had been found after his enigmatical preservation .
they halted at this place and prepared for breakfast , for it was half - past eleven .
herbert went for some fresh water from a stream which ran near , and brought it back in a jug , which neb had provided .
during these preparations harding arranged everything for his astronomical observation .
he chose a clear place on the shore , which the ebbing tide had left perfectly level .
this bed of fine sand was as smooth as ice , not a grain out of place .
it was of little importance whether it was horizontal or not , and it did not matter much whether the stick six feet high , which was planted there , rose perpendicularly .
on the contrary , the engineer inclined it towards the south , that is to say , in the direction of the coast opposite to the sun , for it must not be forgotten that the settlers in lincoln island , as the island was situated in the southern hemisphere , saw the radiant planet describe its diurnal arc above the northern , and not above the southern horizon .
herbert now understood how the engineer was going to proceed to ascertain the culmination of the sun , that is to say its passing the meridian of the island or , in other words , determine due south .
by inclining his stick to the side opposite to the sun , cyrus harding made the shadow longer , and consequently its modifications would be more easily ascertained .
in fact , the longer the needle of a dial is , the more easily can the movement of its point be followed .
the shadow of the stick was nothing but the needle of a dial .
the moment had come , and cyrus harding knelt on the sand , and with little wooden pegs , which he stuck into the sand , he began to mark the successive diminutions of the stick 's shadow .
his companions , bending over him , watched the operation with extreme interest .
the reporter held his chronometer in his hand , ready to tell the hour which it marked when the shadow would be at its shortest .
moreover , as cyrus harding was working on the 16th of april , the day on which the true and the average time are identical , the hour given by gideon spilett would be the true hour then at washington , which would simplify the calculation .
meanwhile as the sun slowly advanced , the shadow slowly diminished , and when it appeared to cyrus harding that it was beginning to increase , he asked , " what o'clock is it ? " " one minute past five , " replied gideon spilett directly .
then , since washington is 77deg 3 ' 11 " as much as to say seventy - seven degrees counted from the meridian of greenwich which the americans take for their starting - point for longitudes concurrently with the english -- it followed that the island must be situated seventy - seven and seventy - five degrees west of the meridian of greenwich , that is to say , on the hundred and fifty - second degree of west longitude .
cyrus harding announced this result to his companions , and taking into consideration errors of observation , as he had done for the latitude , he believed he could positively affirm that the position of lincoln island was between the thirty - fifth and the thirty - seventh parallel , and between the hundred and fiftieth and the hundred and fifty - fifth meridian to the west of the meridian of greenwich .
the possible fault which he attributed to errors in the observation was , it may be seen , of five degrees on both sides , which , at sixty miles to a degree , would give an error of three hundred miles in latitude and longitude for the exact position .
but this error would not influence the determination which it was necessary to take .
it was very evident that lincoln island was at such a distance from every country or island that it would be too hazardous to attempt to reach one in a frail boat .
in fact , this calculation placed it at least twelve hundred miles from tahiti and the islands of the archipelago of the pomoutous , more than eighteen hundred miles from new zealand , and more than four thousand five hundred miles from the american coast !
and when cyrus harding consulted his memory , he could not remember in any way that such an island occupied , in that part of the pacific , the situation assigned to lincoln island .
chapter 15
the next day , the 17th of april , the sailor 's first words were addressed to gideon spilett .
" well , sir , " he asked , " what shall we do to - day ? "
" what the captain pleases , " replied the reporter .
till then the engineer 's companions had been brickmakers and potters , now they were to become metallurgists .
the day before , after breakfast , they had explored as far as the point of mandible cape , seven miles distant from the chimneys .
there , the long series of downs ended , and the soil had a volcanic appearance .
there were no longer high cliffs as at prospect heights , but a strange and capricious border which surrounded the narrow gulf between the two capes , formed of mineral matter , thrown up by the volcano .
arrived at this point the settlers retraced their steps , and at nightfall entered the chimneys ; but they did not sleep before the question of knowing whether they could think of leaving lincoln island or not was definitely settled .
the twelve hundred miles which separated the island from the pomoutous island was a considerable distance .
a boat could not cross it , especially at the approach of the bad season .
now , to construct a simple boat even with the necessary tools , was a difficult work , and the colonists not having tools they must begin by making hammers , axes , adzes , saws , augers , planes , etc . , which would take some time .
it was decided , therefore , that they would winter at lincoln island , and that they would look for a more comfortable dwelling than the chimneys , in which to pass the winter months .
such was the case with the two specimens which cyrus harding had brought back , one of magnetic iron , not carbonated , the other a pyrite , also called sulphuret of iron .
this reduction is made by subjecting the ore with coal to a high temperature , either by the rapid and easy catalan method , which has the advantage of transforming the ore into iron in a single operation , or by the blast furnace , which first smelts the ore , then changes it into iron , by carrying away the three to four per cent . of coal , which is combined with it .
the ore which he had picked up was in itself very pure and rich .
not far from this vein was the vein of coal already made use of by the settlers .
the ingredients for the manufacture being close together would greatly facilitate the treatment of the ore .
this is the cause of the wealth of the mines in great britain , where the coal aids the manufacture of the metal extracted from the same soil at the same time as itself .
" then , captain , " said pencroft , " we are going to work iron ore ? "
" yes , my friend , " replied the engineer , " and for that -- something which will please you -- we must begin by having a seal hunt on the islet . "
" a seal hunt ! " cried the sailor , turning towards gideon spilett .
" are seals needed to make iron ? "
" since cyrus has said so ! " replied the reporter .
but the engineer had already left the chimneys , and pencroft prepared for the seal hunt , without having received any other explanation .
cyrus harding , herbert , gideon spilett , neb , and the sailor were soon collected on the shore , at a place where the channel left a ford passable at low tide .
on their landing some hundreds of penguins looked fearlessly at them .
the hunters , armed with sticks , could have killed them easily , but they were not guilty of such useless massacre , as it was important not to frighten the seals , who were lying on the sand several cable lengths off .
they also respected certain innocent - looking birds , whose wings were reduced to the state of stumps , spread out like fins , ornamented with feathers of a scaly appearance .
the settlers , therefore , prudently advanced towards the north point , walking over ground riddled with little holes , which formed nests for the sea - birds .
towards the extremity of the islet appeared great black heads floating just above the water , having exactly the appearance of rocks in motion .
these were the seals which were to be captured .
it was necessary , however , first to allow them to land , for with their close , short hair , and their fusiform conformation , being excellent swimmers , it is difficult to catch them in the sea , while on land their short , webbed feet prevent their having more than a slow , waddling movement .
pencroft knew the habits of these creatures , and he advised waiting till they were stretched on the sand , when the sun , before long , would send them to sleep .
they must then manage to cut off their retreat and knock them on the head .
the hunters , having concealed themselves behind the rocks , waited silently .
an hour passed before the seals came to play on the sand .
all at once the tall figure of the sailor appeared .
the engineer and his two companions threw themselves between the sea and the seals .
" here are the seals required , captain ! " said the sailor , advancing towards the engineer .
" capital , " replied harding .
" we will make bellows of them ! "
" bellows ! " cried pencroft .
it was , in fact , a blowing - machine , necessary for the treatment of the ore that the engineer wished to manufacture with the skins of the amphibious creatures .
they were of a medium size , for their length did not exceed six feet . they resembled a dog about the head .
as it was useless to burden themselves with the weight of both the animals , neb and pencroft resolved to skin them on the spot , while cyrus harding and the reporter continued to explore the islet .
the sailor and the negro cleverly performed the operation , and three hours afterwards cyrus harding had at his disposal two seals ' skins , which he intended to use in this state , without subjecting them to any tanning process .
the settlers waited till the tide was again low , and crossing the channel they entered the chimneys .
cyrus harding had nothing but the two steel blades from top 's collar , and yet he was so clever , and his companions aided him with so much intelligence , that three days afterwards the little colony 's stock of tools was augmented by a blowing - machine , destined to inject the air into the midst of the ore when it should be subjected to heat -- an indispensable condition to the success of the operation .
on the morning of the 20th of april began the " metallic period , " as the reporter called it in his notes .
the engineer had decided , as has been said , to operate near the veins both of coal and ore .
this settled , they set out in the morning .
neb and pencroft dragged the bellows on a hurdle ; also a quantity of vegetables and animals , which they besides could renew on the way .
the road led through jacamar wood , which they traversed obliquely from southeast to northwest , and in the thickest part .
it was necessary to beat a path , which would in the future form the most direct road to prospect heights and mount franklin .
the trees , belonging to the species already discovered , were magnificent .
these trees produce ligneous roots which , when cooked , are excellent ; from them , by fermentation , a very agreeable liquor is made .
top , who took special charge of the fauna , ran through the grass and brushwood , putting up all sorts of game .
herbert and gideon spilett killed two kangaroos with bows and arrows , and also an animal which strongly resembled both a hedgehog and an ant - eater . it was like the first because it rolled itself into a ball , and bristled with spines , and the second because it had sharp claws , a long slender snout which terminated in a bird 's beak , and an extendible tongue , covered with little thorns which served to hold the insects .
" and when it is in the pot , " asked pencroft naturally , " what will it be like ? "
" an excellent piece of beef , " replied herbert .
" we will not ask more from it , " replied the sailor .
happily for gideon spilett , the animal in question did not belong to the redoubtable family of the plantigrades .
it was only a koala , better known under the name of the sloth , being about the size of a large dog , and having stiff hair of a dirty color , the paws armed with strong claws , which enabled it to climb trees and feed on the leaves .
having identified the animal , which they did not disturb , gideon spilett erased " bear " from the title of his sketch , putting koala in its place , and the journey was resumed .
at five o'clock in the evening , cyrus harding gave the signal to halt .
they were now outside the forest , at the beginning of the powerful spurs which supported mount franklin towards the west .
at a distance of some hundred feet flowed the red creek , and consequently plenty of fresh water was within their reach .
the next day , the 21st of april , cyrus harding accompanied by herbert , went to look for the soil of ancient formation , on which he had already discovered a specimen of ore .
they found the vein above ground , near the source of the creek , at the foot of one of the northeastern spurs .
this ore , very rich in iron , enclosed in its fusible veinstone , was perfectly suited to the mode of reduction which the engineer intended to employ ; that is , the catalan method , but simplified , as it is used in corsica .
in fact , the catalan method , properly so called , requires the construction of kilns and crucibles , in which the ore and the coal , placed in alternate layers , are transformed and reduced , but cyrus harding intended to economize these constructions , and wished simply to form , with the ore and the coal , a cubic mass , to the center of which he would direct the wind from his bellows .
doubtless , it was the proceeding employed by tubalcain , and the first metallurgists of the inhabited world .
the coal , as well as the ore , was collected without trouble on the surface of the ground .
they first broke the ore into little pieces , and cleansed them with the hand from the impurities which soiled their surface .
then coal and ore were arranged in heaps and in successive layers , as the charcoal - burner does with the wood which he wishes to carbonize .
thus the engineer proceeded .
the operation was difficult .
a handle was fixed to the first lump , and was used as a hammer to forge the second on a granite anvil , and thus they obtained a coarse but useful metal .
at length , after many trials and much fatigue , on the 25th of april several bars of iron were forged , and transformed into tools , crowbars , pincers , pickaxes , spades , etc . , which pencroft and neb declared to be real jewels .
but the metal was not yet in its most serviceable state , that is , of steel .
now steel is a combination of iron and coal , which is extracted , either from the liquid ore , by taking from it the excess of coal , or from the iron by adding to it the coal which was wanting .
the first , obtained by the decarburation of the metal , gives natural or puddled steel ; the second , produced by the carburation of the iron , gives steel of cementation .
he then worked this steel , which is malleable both when hot or cold , with the hammer .
neb and pencroft , cleverly directed , made hatchets , which , heated red - hot , and plunged suddenly into cold water , acquired an excellent temper .
chapter 16
it was the 6th of may , a day which corresponds to the 6th of november in the countries of the northern hemisphere .
the sky had been obscured for some days , and it was of importance to make preparations for the winter .
however , the temperature was not as yet much lower , and a centigrade thermometer , transported to lincoln island , would still have marked an average of ten to twelve degrees above zero .
in any case if cold did not yet threaten them , the rainy season would begin , and on this lonely island , exposed to all the fury of the elements , in mid - ocean , bad weather would be frequent , and probably terrible .
the question of a more comfortable dwelling than the chimneys must therefore be seriously considered and promptly resolved on .
pencroft , naturally , had some predilection for the retreat which he had discovered , but he well understood that another must be found .
the chimneys had been already visited by the sea , under circumstances which are known , and it would not do to be exposed again to a similar accident .
" besides , " added cyrus harding , who this day was talking of these things with his companions , " we have some precautions to take . "
" why ?
the island is not inhabited , " said the reporter .
" that is probable , " replied the engineer , " although we have not yet explored the interior ; but if no human beings are found , i fear that dangerous animals may abound .
it is necessary to guard against a possible attack , so that we shall not be obliged to watch every night , or to keep up a fire .
" what ! " said herbert , " at such a distance from land ? "
" yes , my boy , " replied the engineer .
" these pirates are bold sailors as well as formidable enemies , and we must take measures accordingly . "
" well , " replied pencroft , " we will fortify ourselves against savages with two legs as well as against savages with four .
but , captain , will it not be best to explore every part of the island before undertaking anything else ? "
" that is true , " replied the engineer , " but you forget , my friends , that it will be necessary to establish ourselves in the neighborhood of a watercourse , and that , from the summit of mount franklin , we could not see towards the west , either stream or river .
here , on the contrary , we are placed between the mercy and lake grant , an advantage which must not be neglected .
and , besides , this side , looking towards the east , is not exposed as the other is to the trade - winds , which in this hemisphere blow from the northwest . "
" then , captain , " replied the sailor , " let us build a house on the edge of the lake .
neither bricks nor tools are wanting now .
after having been brickmakers , potters , smelters , and smiths , we shall surely know how to be masons ! "
" yes , my friend ; but before coming to any decision we must consider the matter thoroughly .
" that is true , cyrus , " replied the reporter , " but we have already examined all that mass of granite , and there is not a hole , not a cranny ! "
" no , not one ! " added pencroft .
i can see that on the front which looks seaward , five or six rooms-- "
" with windows to light them ! " said herbert , laughing .
" and a staircase to climb up to them ! " added neb .
" you are laughing , " cried the sailor , " and why ?
what is there impossible in what i propose ?
is n't it true , captain , that you will make powder the very day we want it ? "
cyrus harding listened to the enthusiastic pencroft developing his fanciful projects .
to attack this mass of granite , even by a mine , was herculean work , and it was really vexing that nature could not help them at their need .
the nests of the rock pigeons which fluttered at its summit were only , in reality , holes bored at the very top , and on the irregular edge of the granite .
it was a provoking circumstance , and as to attacking this cliff , either with pickaxe or with powder , so as to effect a sufficient excavation , it was not to be thought of .
it so happened that , on all this part of the shore , pencroft had discovered the only habitable shelter , that is to say , the chimneys , which now had to be abandoned .
the exploration ended , the colonists found themselves at the north angle of the cliff , where it terminated in long slopes which died away on the shore .
from this place , to its extreme limit in the west , it only formed a sort of declivity , a thick mass of stones , earth , and sand , bound together by plants , bushes , and grass inclined at an angle of only forty - five degrees .
clumps of trees grew on these slopes , which were also carpeted with thick grass .
but the vegetation did not extend far , and a long , sandy plain , which began at the foot of these slopes , reached to the beach .
cyrus harding thought , not without reason , that the overplus of the lake must overflow on this side .
the engineer now proposed to his companions to climb the slope , and to return to the chimneys by the heights , while exploring the northern and eastern shores of the lake .
the eye feasted on the groups of trees .
some old trunks , bent with age , showed black against the verdant grass which covered the ground .
crowds of brilliant cockatoos screamed among the branches , moving prisms , hopping from one bough to another .
the settlers instead of going directly to the north bank of the lake , made a circuit round the edge of the plateau , so as to join the mouth of the creek on its left bank .
the mouth of the red creek , at the place where it entered into the lake , was soon reached .
the explorers recognized on the opposite shore the point which they had visited on their descent from mount franklin .
the colonists , walking apart , but not straying far from each other , began to skirt the edge of the lake , which was very steep .
the water appeared to be full of fish , and pencroft resolved to make some fishing - rods , so as to try and catch some .
the northeast point was first to be doubled .
on this side the banks were less woody , but clumps of trees , here and there , added to the picturesqueness of the country .
lake grant was viewed from thence in all its extent , and no breath disturbed the surface of its waters .
top , in beating the bushes , put up flocks of birds of different kinds , which gideon spilett and herbert saluted with arrows .
but top was not so particular in these things as his masters , and it was agreed that the coot should be for his supper .
the settlers were now following the eastern bank of the lake , and they would not be long in reaching the part which they already knew .
the engineer was much surprised at not seeing any indication of the discharge of water .
the reporter and the sailor talked with him , and he could not conceal his astonishment .
at this moment top , who had been very quiet till then , gave signs of agitation .
the intelligent animal went backwards and forwards on the shore , stopped suddenly , and looked at the water , one paw raised , as if he was pointing at some invisible game ; then he barked furiously , and was suddenly silent .
neither cyrus harding nor his companions had at first paid any attention to top 's behavior ; but the dog 's barking soon became so frequent that the engineer noticed it .
" what is there , top ? " he asked .
the dog bounded towards his master , seeming to be very uneasy , and then rushed again towards the bank .
then , all at once , he plunged into the lake .
" here , top ! " cried cyrus harding , who did not like his dog to venture into the treacherous water .
" what 's happening down there ? " asked pencroft , examining the surface of the lake .
" top smells some amphibious creature , " replied herbert .
" an alligator , perhaps , " said the reporter .
meanwhile top had returned at his master 's call , and had regained the shore : but he could not stay quiet ; he plunged in among the tall grass , and guided by instinct , he appeared to follow some invisible being which was slipping along under the surface of the water .
however the water was calm ; not a ripple disturbed its surface .
several times the settlers stopped on the bank , and observed it attentively .
nothing appeared .
the engineer was puzzled .
" let us pursue this exploration to the end , " said he .
half an hour after they had all arrived at the southeast angle of the lake , on prospect heights .
" but what importance do you attach to knowing that , my dear cyrus ? " asked gideon spilett .
" considerable importance , " replied the engineer ; " for if it flows through the cliff there is probably some cavity , which it would be easy to render habitable after turning away the water . "
" but is it not possible , captain , that the water flows away at the bottom of the lake , " said herbert , " and that it reaches the sea by some subterranean passage ? "
" that might be , " replied the engineer , " and should it be so we shall be obliged to build our house ourselves , since nature has not done it for us . "
the colonists were about to begin to traverse the plateau to return to the chimneys , when top gave new signs of agitation .
he barked with fury , and before his master could restrain him , he had plunged a second time into the lake .
all ran towards the bank .
the dog was already more than twenty feet off , and cyrus was calling him back , when an enormous head emerged from the water , which did not appear to be deep in that place .
herbert recognized directly the species of amphibian to which the tapering head , with large eyes , and adorned with long silky mustaches , belonged .
it was not a lamantin , but one of that species of the order of cetaceans , which bear the name of the " dugong , " for its nostrils were open at the upper part of its snout .
the enormous animal rushed on the dog , who tried to escape by returning towards the shore .
his master could do nothing to save him , and before gideon spilett or herbert thought of bending their bows , top , seized by the dugong , had disappeared beneath the water .
neb , his iron - tipped spear in his hand , wished to go to top 's help , and attack the dangerous animal in its own element .
" no , neb , " said the engineer , restraining his courageous servant .
meanwhile , a struggle was going on beneath the water , an inexplicable struggle , for in his situation top could not possibly resist ; and judging by the bubbling of the surface it must be also a terrible struggle , and could not but terminate in the death of the dog !
but suddenly , in the middle of a foaming circle , top reappeared .
thrown in the air by some unknown power , he rose ten feet above the surface of the lake , fell again into the midst of the agitated waters , and then soon gained the shore , without any severe wounds , miraculously saved .
doubtless , the dugong , attacked by some powerful animal , after having released the dog , was fighting on its own account .
but it did not last long .
the water became red with blood , and the body of the dugong , emerging from the sheet of scarlet which spread around , soon stranded on a little beach at the south angle of the lake .
the colonists ran towards it .
at its neck was a wound , which appeared to have been produced by a sharp blade .
what could the amphibious creature have been , who , by this terrible blow had destroyed the formidable dugong ?
no one could tell , and much interested in this incident , harding and his companions returned to the chimneys .
chapter 17
already flocks of birds had attacked the mass of flesh , and had to be driven away with stones , for cyrus wished to keep the fat for the use of the colony .
as to the animal 's flesh it would furnish excellent food , for in the islands of the malay archipelago and elsewhere , it is especially reserved for the table of the native princes .
but that was neb 's affair .
at this moment cyrus harding had other thoughts .
he was much interested in the incident of the day before .
he remained at the edge of the lake , looking , observing ; but nothing appeared under the tranquil waters , which sparkled in the first rays of the rising sun .
at the beach , on which lay the body of the dugong , the water was tolerably shallow , but from this point the bottom of the lake sloped gradually , and it was probable that the depth was considerable in the center .
the lake might be considered as a large center basin , which was filled by the water from the red creek .
" well , cyrus , " said the reporter , " there seems to be nothing suspicious in this water . "
" no , my dear spilett , " replied the engineer , " and i really do not know how to account for the incident of yesterday . "
" i acknowledge , " returned spilett , " that the wound given this creature is , at least , very strange , and i can not explain either how top was so vigorously cast up out of the water .
one could have thought that a powerful arm hurled him up , and that the same arm with a dagger killed the dugong ! "
" yes , " replied the engineer , who had become thoughtful ; " there is something there that i can not understand .
but do you better understand either , my dear spilett , in what way i was saved myself -- how i was drawn from the waves , and carried to the downs ?
no ! is it not true ?
now , i feel sure that there is some mystery there , which , doubtless , we shall discover some day .
let us observe , but do not dwell on these singular incidents before our companions .
let us keep our remarks to ourselves , and continue our work . "
by throwing in some bits of wood he found that it set towards the southern angle .
he followed the current , and arrived at the south point of the lake .
there was there a sort of depression in the water , as if it was suddenly lost in some fissure in the ground .
harding listened ; placing his ear to the level of the lake , he very distinctly heard the noise of a subterranean fall .
well , i can find it ! "
the engineer cut a long branch , stripped it of its leaves , and plunging it into the angle between the two banks , he found that there was a large hole one foot only beneath the surface of the water .
this hole was the opening so long looked for in vain , and the force of the current was such that the branch was torn from the engineer 's hands and disappeared .
" there is no doubt about it now , " repeated harding .
" there is the outlet , and i will lay it open to view ! "
" how ? " asked gideon spilett .
" by lowering the level of the water of the lake three feet . "
" and how will you lower the level ? "
" by opening another outlet larger than this . "
" at what place , cyrus ? "
" at the part of the bank nearest the coast . "
" but it is a mass of granite ! " observed spilett .
" well , " replied cyrus harding , " i will blow up the granite , and the water escaping , will subside , so as to lay bare this opening-- "
" and make a waterfall , by falling on to the beach , " added the reporter .
" a fall that we shall make use of ! " replied cyrus .
" come , come ! "
the engineer hurried away his companion , whose confidence in harding was such that he did not doubt the enterprise would succeed .
and yet , how was this granite wall to be opened without powder , and with imperfect instruments ?
was not this work upon which the engineer was so bent above their strength ?
when harding and the reporter entered the chimneys , they found herbert and pencroft unloading their raft of wood .
" the woodmen have just finished , captain . " said the sailor , laughing , " and when you want masons-- "
" masons,--no , but chemists , " replied the engineer .
" yes , " added the reporter , " we are going to blow up the island-- "
" blow up the island ? " cried pencroft .
" part of it , at least , " replied spilett .
" listen to me , my friends , " said the engineer .
and he made known to them the result of his observations .
according to him , a cavity , more or less considerable , must exist in the mass of granite which supported prospect heights , and he intended to penetrate into it .
therefore an explosive substance must be manufactured , which would make a deep trench in some other part of the shore .
this was what harding was going to attempt with the minerals which nature placed at his disposal .
it is useless to say with what enthusiasm all , especially pencroft , received this project .
to employ great means , open the granite , create a cascade , that suited the sailor .
and he would just as soon be a chemist as a mason or bootmaker , since the engineer wanted chemicals .
he would be all that they liked , " even a professor of dancing and deportment , " said he to neb , if that was ever necessary .
a few minutes after them , cyrus harding , herbert , and gideon spilett , dragging the hurdle , went towards the vein of coals , where those shistose pyrites abound which are met with in the most recent transition soil , and of which harding had already found a specimen .
all the day being employed in carrying a quantity of these stones to the chimneys , by evening they had several tons .
the next day , the 8th of may , the engineer began his manipulations .
this was the object to be attained .
cyrus harding chose , behind the chimneys , a site where the ground was perfectly level .
on this ground he placed a layer of branches and chopped wood , on which were piled some pieces of shistose pyrites , buttressed one against the other , the whole being covered with a thin layer of pyrites , previously reduced to the size of a nut .
this done , they set fire to the wood , the heat was communicated to the shist , which soon kindled , since it contains coal and sulphur .
then new layers of bruised pyrites were arranged so as to form an immense heap , the exterior of which was covered with earth and grass , several air - holes being left , as if it was a stack of wood which was to be carbonized to make charcoal .
neb and pencroft had taken away the fat from the dugong , and placed it in large earthen pots .
it was then necessary to separate the glycerine from the fat by saponifying it .
now , to obtain this result , it had to be treated either with soda or lime .
now , a practical man , like cyrus harding , would rather try to obtain soda .
was this difficult ?
no ; for marine plants abounded on the shore , glass - wort , ficoides , and all those fucaceae which form wrack .
a large quantity of these plants was collected , first dried , then burnt in holes in the open air .
but this was not all .
cyrus harding still needed , in view of his future preparation , another substance , nitrate of potash , which is better known under the name of salt niter , or of saltpeter .
but this acid was wanting , and he would have been in some difficulty , if nature had not happily furnished the saltpeter , without giving them any other trouble than that of picking it up .
herbert found a vein of it at the foot of mount franklin , and they had nothing to do but purify this salt .
these different works lasted a week .
they were finished before the transformation of the sulphuret into sulphate of iron had been accomplished .
all this was finished about the 18th of may , nearly at the time when the chemical transformation terminated .
gideon spilett , herbert , neb , and pencroft , skillfully directed by the engineer , had become most clever workmen .
before all masters , necessity is the one most listened to , and who teaches the best .
when the heap of pyrites had been entirely reduced by fire , the result of the operation , consisting of sulphate of iron , sulphate of alumina , flint , remains of coal , and cinders was placed in a basinful of water .
cyrus harding had now at his disposal a large quantity of these sulphate of iron crystals , from which the sulphuric acid had to be extracted .
the making of sulphuric acid is a very expensive manufacture .
considerable works are necessary -- a special set of tools , an apparatus of platina , leaden chambers , unassailable by the acid , and in which the transformation is performed , etc . the engineer had none of these at his disposal , but he knew that , in bohemia especially , sulphuric acid is manufactured by very simple means , which have also the advantage of producing it to a superior degree of concentration .
it is thus that the acid known under the name of nordhausen acid is made .
to obtain sulphuric acid , cyrus harding had only one operation to make , to calcine the sulphate of iron crystals in a closed vase , so that the sulphuric acid should distil in vapor , which vapor , by condensation , would produce the acid .
the operation was successfully completed , and on the 20th of may , twelve days after commencing it , the engineer was the possessor of the agent which later he hoped to use in so many different ways .
now , why did he wish for this agent ?
simply to produce azotic acid ; and that was easy , since saltpeter , attacked by sulphuric acid , gives azotic , or nitric , acid by distillation .
but , after all , how was he going to employ this azotic acid ?
his companions were still ignorant of this , for he had not informed them of the result at which he aimed .
however , the engineer had nearly accomplished his purpose , and by a last operation he would procure the substance which had given so much trouble .
taking some azotic acid , he mixed it with glycerine , which had been previously concentrated by evaporation , subjected to the water - bath , and he obtained , without even employing a refrigerant mixture , several pints of an oily yellow mixture .
this last operation cyrus harding had made alone , in a retired place , at a distance from the chimneys , for he feared the danger of an explosion , and when he showed a bottle of this liquid to his friends , he contented himself with saying,-- " here is nitro - glycerine ! "
it was really this terrible production , of which the explosive power is perhaps tenfold that of ordinary powder , and which has already caused so many accidents .
however , since a way has been found to transform it into dynamite , that is to say , to mix with it some solid substance , clay or sugar , porous enough to hold it , the dangerous liquid has been used with some security .
but dynamite was not yet known at the time when the settlers worked on lincoln island .
" and is it that liquid that is going to blow up our rocks ? " said pencroft incredulously .
" yes , my friend , " replied the engineer , " and this nitro - glycerine will produce so much the more effect , as the granite is extremely hard , and will oppose a greater resistance to the explosion . "
" and when shall we see this , captain ? "
" to - morrow , as soon as we have dug a hole for the mine , replied the engineer . "
the next day , the 21st of may , at daybreak , the miners went to the point which formed the eastern shore of lake grant , and was only five hundred feet from the coast .
at this place , the plateau inclined downwards from the waters , which were only restrained by their granite case .
therefore , if this case was broken , the water would escape by the opening and form a stream , which , flowing over the inclined surface of the plateau , would rush on to the beach .
consequently , the level of the lake would be greatly lowered , and the opening where the water escaped would be exposed , which was their final aim .
under the engineer 's directions , pencroft , armed with a pickaxe , which he handled skillfully and vigorously , attacked the granite .
the hole was made on the point of the shore , slanting , so that it should meet a much lower level than that of the water of the lake .
in this way the explosive force , by scattering the rock , would open a large place for the water to rush out .
the work took some time , for the engineer , wishing to produce a great effect , intended to devote not less than seven quarts of nitro - glycerine to the operation .
but pencroft , relieved by neb , did so well , that towards four o'clock in the evening , the mine was finished .
now the question of setting fire to the explosive substance was raised .
generally , nitro - glycerine is ignited by caps of fulminate , which in bursting cause the explosion .
a shock is therefore needed to produce the explosion , for , simply lighted , this substance would burn without exploding .
cyrus harding could certainly have fabricated a percussion cap .
another long fiber , previously impregnated with sulphur , was attached to the middle of the first , by one end , while the other lay on the ground several feet distant from the mine .
this done , harding lit the end of the sulphured fiber , and leaving the place , he returned with his companions to the chimneys .
the fiber was intended to burn five and twenty minutes , and , in fact , five and twenty minutes afterwards a most tremendous explosion was heard .
the island appeared to tremble to its very foundation .
stones were projected in the air as if by the eruption of a volcano .
the shock produced by the displacing of the air was such , that the rocks of the chimneys shook .
the settlers , although they were more than two miles from the mine , were thrown on the ground .
they rose , climbed the plateau , and ran towards the place where the bank of the lake must have been shattered by the explosion .
a cheer escaped them !
a large rent was seen in the granite !
cyrus harding 's project had succeeded , but , according to his usual habit he showed no satisfaction ; with closed lips and a fixed look , he remained motionless .
herbert was in ecstasies , neb bounded with joy , pencroft nodded his great head , murmuring these words,-- " come , our engineer gets on capitally ! "
the nitro - glycerine had indeed acted powerfully .
the opening which it had made was so large that the volume of water which escaped through this new outlet was at least treble that which before passed through the old one .
the result was , that a short time after the operation the level of the lake would be lowered two feet , or more .
the settlers went to the chimneys to take some pickaxes , iron - tipped spears , string made of fibers , flint and steel ; they then returned to the plateau , top accompanying them .
on the way the sailor could not help saying to the engineer,--
" do n't you think , captain , that by means of that charming liquid you have made , one could blow up the whole of our island ? "
" without any doubt , the island , continents , and the world itself , " replied the engineer .
" it is only a question of quantity . "
" then could you not use this nitro - glycerine for loading firearms ? " asked the sailor .
" no , pencroft ; for it is too explosive a substance .
but it would be easy to make some guncotton , or even ordinary powder , as we have azotic acid , saltpeter , sulphur , and coal .
unhappily , it is the guns which we have not got .
" oh , captain , " replied the sailor , " with a little determination-- "
pencroft had erased the word " impossible " from the dictionary of lincoln island .
in a few minutes the settlers had reached the lower point of the lake , and a glance showed them that the object had been attained .
in fact , in the side of the lake , and now above the surface of the water , appeared the long - looked - for opening .
a narrow ridge , left bare by the retreat of the water , allowed them to approach it .
the engineer then approached , and found that the sides of the opening , in its upper part at least , had not a slope of more than from thirty to thirty - five degrees .
" well , captain , what are we stopping for ? " asked the sailor , impatient to enter the narrow passage .
" you see top has got before us ! "
" very well , " replied the engineer .
" but we must see our way . neb , go and cut some resinous branches . "
neb and herbert ran to the edge of the lake , shaded with pines and other green trees , and soon returned with some branches , which they made into torches .
the torches were lighted with flint and steel , and cyrus harding leading , the settlers ventured into the dark passage , which the overplus of the lake had formerly filled .
the granite , worn by the water for an infinite time , was very slippery , and falls were to be dreaded .
but the settlers were all attached to each other by a cord , as is frequently done in ascending mountains .
happily some projections of the granite , forming regular steps , made the descent less perilous .
drops , still hanging from the rocks , shone here and there under the light of the torches , and the explorers guessed that the sides were clothed with innumerable stalactites .
the mass was compact , and of an extremely close grain .
pluto and not neptune had bored it with his own hand , and on the wall traces of an eruptive work could be distinguished , which all the washing of the water had not been able totally to efface .
they did not speak , but they thought ; and the thought came to more than one , that some polypus or other gigantic cephalopod might inhabit the interior cavities , which were in communication with the sea .
however , top kept at the head of the little band , and they could rely on the sagacity of the dog , who would not fail to give the alarm if there was any need for it .
after having descended about a hundred feet , following a winding road , harding who was walking on before , stopped , and his companions came up with him .
the place where they had halted was wider , so as to form a cavern of moderate dimensions .
" well , my dear cyrus , " said gideon spilett , " here is a very secure retreat , well hid in the depths of the rock , but it is , however , uninhabitable . "
" why uninhabitable ? " asked the sailor .
" could n't we enlarge it , hollow it out , make openings to let in light and air ? " replied pencroft , who now thought nothing impossible .
" let us go on with our exploration , " said cyrus harding .
" we have only gone a third of the way , " observed herbert .
" nearly a third , " replied harding , " for we have descended a hundred feet from the opening , and it is not impossible that a hundred feet farther down-- "
" where is top ? " asked neb , interrupting his master .
they searched the cavern , but the dog was not there .
" most likely he has gone on , " said pencroft .
" let us join him , " replied harding .
the descent was continued .
the engineer carefully observed all the deviations of the passage , and notwithstanding so many detours , he could easily have given an account of its general direction , which went towards the sea .
the settlers had gone some fifty feet farther , when their attention was attracted by distant sounds which came up from the depths .
" that is top barking ! " cried herbert .
" yes , " replied pencroft , " and our brave dog is barking furiously ! "
" we have our iron - tipped spears , " said cyrus harding .
" keep on your guard , and forward ! "
" it is becoming more and more interesting , " murmured gideon spilett in the sailor 's ear , who nodded .
harding and his companions rushed to the help of their dog .
top 's barking became more and more perceptible , and it seemed strangely fierce .
was he engaged in a struggle with some animal whose retreat he had disturbed ?
without thinking of the danger to which they might be exposed , the explorers were now impelled by an irresistible curiosity , and in a few minutes , sixteen feet lower they rejoined top .
there the passage ended in a vast and magnificent cavern .
pencroft and neb , waving their torches , threw the light into every crevice ; and at the same time , harding , gideon spilett , and herbert , their spears raised , were ready for any emergency which might arise .
the enormous cavern was empty .
there was nothing there , not an animal , not a human being ; and yet top continued to bark .
neither caresses nor threats could make him be silent .
" there must be a place somewhere , by which the waters of the lake reached the sea , " said the engineer .
" of course , " replied pencroft , " and we must take care not to tumble into a hole . "
" go , top , go ! " cried harding .
the dog , excited by his master 's words , ran towards the extremity of the cavern , and there redoubled his barking .
they followed him , and by the light of the torches , perceived the mouth of a regular well in the granite .
the torches were held over the opening : nothing could be seen .
harding took a lighted branch , and threw it into the abyss .
the blazing resin , whose illuminating power increased still more by the rapidity of its fall , lighted up the interior of the well , but yet nothing appeared .
the flame then went out with a slight hiss , which showed that it had reached the water , that is to say , the level of the sea .
the engineer , calculating the time employed in its fall , was able to calculate the depth of the well , which was found to be about ninety feet .
the floor of the cavern must thus be situated ninety feet above the level of the sea .
" here is our dwelling , " said cyrus harding .
" but it was occupied by some creature , " replied gideon spilett , whose curiosity was not yet satisfied .
" well , the creature , amphibious or otherwise , has made off through this opening , " replied the engineer , " and has left the place for us . "
" never mind , " added the sailor , " i should like very much to be top just for a quarter of an hour , for he does n't bark for nothing ! "
cyrus harding looked at his dog , and those of his companions who were near him might have heard him murmur these words,--
" yes , i believe that top knows more than we do about a great many things . "
however , the wishes of the settlers were for the most part satisfied .
chance , aided by the marvelous sagacity of their leader , had done them great service .
the water which had left it could not return .
the place was free .
two difficulties remained ; firstly , the possibility of lighting this excavation in the midst of solid rock ; secondly , the necessity of rendering the means of access more easy .
if light was thus obtained , so would a means of access , for it would be as easy to pierce a door as windows , and to establish an exterior ladder .
harding made known his ideas to his companions .
" then , captain , let us set to work ! " replied pencroft .
" i have my pickaxe , and i shall soon make my way through this wall .
where shall i strike ? "
" here , " replied the engineer , showing the sturdy sailor a considerable recess in the side , which would much diminish the thickness .
pencroft attacked the granite , and for half an hour , by the light of the torches , he made the splinters fly around him .
this work had lasted two hours , and they began to fear that at this spot the wall would not yield to the pickaxe , when at a last blow given by gideon spilett , the instrument , passing through the rock , fell outside .
" hurrah ! hurrah ! " cried pencroft .
the wall only measured there three feet in thickness .
harding applied his eye to the aperture , which overlooked the ground from a height of eighty feet .
before him was extended the sea - coast , the islet , and beyond the open sea .
she alone had hollowed this fairy alhambra in a mass of granite .
where they had only expected to find a narrow cavity , they had found a sort of marvelous palace , and neb had taken off his hat , as if he had been transported into a temple !
cries of admiration issued from every mouth .
hurrahs resounded , and the echo was repeated again and again till it died away in the dark naves .
" ah , my friends ! " exclaimed cyrus harding , " when we have lighted the interior of this place , and have arranged our rooms and storehouses in the left part , we shall still have this splendid cavern , which we will make our study and our museum ! "
" and we will call it?-- " asked herbert .
" granite house , " replied harding ; a name which his companions again saluted with a cheer .
the torches were now almost consumed , and as they were obliged to return by the passage to reach the summit of the plateau , it was decided to put off the work necessary for the arrangement of their new dwelling till the next day .
meanwhile , the engineer was standing motionless , his eyes fixed on the gulf , without uttering a word .
the sailor approached him , and touching his arm , " captain ! " said he .
" what do you want , my friend ? " asked the engineer , as if he had returned from the land of dreams .
" the torches will soon go out . "
" forward ! " replied cyrus harding .
the little band left the cavern and began to ascend through the dark passage .
top closed the rear , still growling every now and then .
chapter 19
the next day , the 22nd of may , the arrangement of their new dwelling was commenced .
in fact , the settlers longed to exchange the insufficient shelter of the chimneys for this large and healthy retreat , in the midst of solid rock , and sheltered from the water both of the sea and sky .
their former dwelling was not , however , to be entirely abandoned , for the engineer intended to make a manufactory of it for important works .
cyrus harding 's first care was to find out the position of the front of granite house from the outside .
he went to the beach , and as the pickaxe when it escaped from the hands of the reporter must have fallen perpendicularly to the foot of the cliff , the finding it would be sufficient to show the place where the hole had been pierced in the granite .
the pickaxe was easily found , and the hole could be seen in a perpendicular line above the spot where it was stuck in the sand .
some rock pigeons were already flying in and out of the narrow opening ; they evidently thought that granite house had been discovered on purpose for them .
it was the engineer 's intention to divide the right portion of the cavern into several rooms , preceded by an entrance passage , and to light it by means of five windows and a door , pierced in the front .
pencroft was much pleased with the five windows , but he could not understand the use of the door , since the passage offered a natural staircase , through which it would always be easy to enter granite house .
" my friend , " replied harding , " if it is easy for us to reach our dwelling by this passage , it will be equally easy for others besides us .
" and how shall we get in ? " asked the sailor .
" by an outside ladder , " replied cyrus harding , " a rope ladder , which , once drawn up , will render access to our dwelling impossible . "
" but why so many precautions ? " asked pencroft .
" as yet we have seen no dangerous animals .
as to our island being inhabited by natives , i do n't believe it ! "
" are you quite sure of that , pencroft ? " asked the engineer , looking at the sailor .
" of course we shall not be quite sure , till we have explored it in every direction , " replied pencroft .
" yes , " said harding , " for we know only a small portion of it as yet .
but at any rate , if we have no enemies in the interior , they may come from the exterior , for parts of the pacific are very dangerous .
we must be provided against every contingency . "
cyrus harding spoke wisely ; and without making any further objection , pencroft prepared to execute his orders .
the front of granite house was then to be lighted by five windows and a door , besides a large bay window and some smaller oval ones , which would admit plenty of light to enter into the marvelous nave which was to be their chief room .
this facade , situated at a height of eighty feet above the ground , was exposed to the east , and the rising sun saluted it with its first rays .
it was found to be just at that part of the cliff which was between the projection at the mouth of the mercy and a perpendicular line traced above the heap of rocks which formed the chimneys .
thus the winds from the northeast would only strike it obliquely , for it was protected by the projection .
the first work was to make the openings .
this would have taken too long with the pickaxe alone , and it is known that harding was an ingenious man .
he had still a quantity of nitro - glycerine at his disposal , and he employed it usefully .
by means of this explosive substance the rock was broken open at the very places chosen by the engineer .
following the plan proposed by cyrus harding , the space was to be divided into five compartments looking out on the sea ; to the right , an entry with a door , which would meet the ladder ; then a kitchen , thirty feet long ; a dining - room , measuring forty feet ; a sleeping - room , of equal size ; and lastly , a " visitor 's room , " petitioned for by pencroft , and which was next to the great hall .
these rooms , or rather this suite of rooms , would not occupy all the depth of the cave .
there would be also a corridor and a storehouse , in which their tools , provisions , and stores would be kept .
all the productions of the island , the flora as well as the fauna , were to be there in the best possible state of preservation , and completely sheltered from the damp .
there was no want of space , so that each object could be methodically arranged .
besides , the colonists had still at their disposal the little grotto above the great cavern , which was like the garret of the new dwelling .
this plan settled , it had only to be put into execution .
the miners became brickmakers again , then the bricks were brought to the foot of granite house .
till then , harding and his companions had only entered the cavern by the long passage .
cyrus harding , therefore , resolved to proceed without any further delay to the fabrication of a strong rope ladder , which , once raised , would render granite house completely inaccessible .
other ropes were made with vegetable fibers , and a sort of crane with a tackle was fixed at the door .
there was no want of lime , and some thousands of bricks were there ready to be used .
the framework of the partitions was soon raised , very roughly at first , and in a short time , the cave was divided into rooms and storehouses , according to the plan agreed upon .
these different works progressed rapidly under the direction of the engineer , who himself handled the hammer and the trowel .
no labor came amiss to cyrus harding , who thus set an example to his intelligent and zealous companions .
they worked with confidence , even gaily , pencroft always having some joke to crack , sometimes carpenter , sometimes rope - maker , sometimes mason , while he communicated his good humor to all the members of their little world .
his faith in the engineer was complete ; nothing could disturb it .
he believed him capable of undertaking anything and succeeding in everything .
he knew how communicable confidence is ; he even smiled to hear him speak , and said nothing of the uneasiness for the future which he felt .
it was on themselves , on themselves alone , that the settlers must depend , for the distance of lincoln island from all other land was such , that to hazard themselves in a boat , of a necessarily inferior construction , would be a serious and perilous thing .
" but , " as the sailor said , " they quite took the wind out of the sails of the robinsons , for whom everything was done by a miracle . "
in fact , they were energetic ; an energetic man will succeed where an indolent one would vegetate and inevitably perish .
herbert distinguished himself in these works .
he was intelligent and active ; understanding quickly , he performed well ; and cyrus harding became more and more attached to the boy .
neb was neb : he was what he would be always , courage , zeal , devotion , self - denial personified .
he had the same faith in his master that pencroft had , but he showed it less vehemently .
when the sailor was enthusiastic , neb always looked as if he would say , " nothing could be more natural . "
pencroft and he were great friends .
harding had been able , fortunately , to divide it in two parts , profiting by an overhanging of the cliff which made a projection forty feet above the ground .
this projection , carefully leveled by the pickaxe , made a sort of platform , to which they fixed the first ladder , of which the oscillation was thus diminished one - half , and a rope permitted it to be raised to the level of granite house .
the settlers soon became habituated to the use of this ladder .
they were light and active , and pencroft , as a sailor , accustomed to run up the masts and shrouds , was able to give them lessons .
but pencroft was such a zealous master , that top ended by properly performing his ascents , and soon mounted the ladder as readily as his brethren in the circus .
it must be mentioned here , that during these works , which were actively conducted , for the bad season was approaching , the alimentary question was not neglected .
every day , the reporter and herbert , who had been voted purveyors to the colony , devoted some hours to the chase .
as yet , they only hunted in jacamar wood , on the left of the river , because , for want of a bridge or boat , the mercy had not yet been crossed .
all the immense woods , to which the name of the forests of the far west had been given , were not explored .
besides , herbert discovered towards the southwest point of the lagoon a natural warren , a slightly damp meadow , covered with willows and aromatic herbs which scented the air , such as thyme , basil , savory , all the sweet - scented species of the labiated plants , which the rabbits appeared to be particularly fond of .
on the reporter observing that since the table was spread for the rabbits , it was strange that the rabbits themselves should be wanting , the two sportsmen carefully explored the warren .
at any rate , it produced an abundance of useful plants , and a naturalist would have had a good opportunity of studying many specimens of the vegetable kingdom .
when , afterwards , pencroft asked the use of this collection of herbs,--
" for medicine , " replied the lad , " to treat us when we are ill . "
" why should we be ill , since there are no doctors in the island ? " asked pencroft quite seriously .
" here are the burrows ! " cried herbert .
" yes , " replied the reporter , " so i see . "
" but are they inhabited ? "
" that is the question . "
hunters and dog ran in vain ; these rodents escaped them easily .
but the reporter resolved not to leave the place , until he had captured at least half - a - dozen of the quadrupeds .
he wished to stock their larder first , and domesticate those which they might take later .
at last , after half an hour , four rodents were taken in their holes .
they were similar to their european brethren , and are commonly known by the name of american rabbits .
this produce of the chase was brought back to granite house , and figured at the evening repast .
on the 31st of may the partitions were finished .
the rooms had now only to be furnished , and this would be work for the long winter days .
a chimney was established in the first room , which served as a kitchen .
the pipe destined to conduct the smoke outside gave some trouble to these amateur bricklayers .
when these interior arrangements were finished , the engineer occupied himself in blocking up the outlet by the lake , so as to prevent any access by that way .
masses of rock were rolled to the entrance and strongly cemented together .
however , he used the waterfall so as to lead a small stream of fresh water to the new dwelling .
a little trench , made below their level , produced this result ; and this derivation from a pure and inexhaustible source yielded twenty - five or thirty gallons a day .
there would never be any want of water at granite house .
at last all was finished , and it was time , for the bad season was near .
gideon spilett had very artistically arranged on the rocky projections around the windows plants of different kinds , as well as long streaming grass , so that the openings were picturesquely framed in green , which had a pleasing effect .
the inhabitants of this solid , healthy , and secure dwelling , could not but be charmed with their work .
the view from the windows extended over a boundless horizon , which was closed by the two mandible capes on the north , and claw cape on the south .
all union bay was spread before them .
yes , our brave settlers had reason to be satisfied , and pencroft was lavish in his praise of what he humorously called , " his apartments on the fifth floor above the ground ! "
chapter 20
the tenants of granite house could appreciate the advantages of a dwelling which sheltered them from the inclement weather .
the chimneys would have been quite insufficient to protect them against the rigor of winter , and it was to be feared that the high tides would make another irruption .
cyrus harding had taken precautions against this contingency , so as to preserve as much as possible the forge and furnace which were established there .
during the whole of the month of june the time was employed in different occupations , which excluded neither hunting nor fishing , the larder being , therefore , abundantly supplied .
he soon made some snares with creepers , by the aid of which the warren henceforth every day furnished its quota of rodents .
neb employed nearly all his time in salting or smoking meat , which insured their always having plenty of provisions .
the question of clothes was now seriously discussed , the settlers having no other garments than those they wore when the balloon threw them on the island .
these clothes were warm and good ; they had taken great care of them as well as of their linen , and they were perfectly whole , but they would soon need to be replaced .
moreover , if the winter was severe , the settlers would suffer greatly from cold .
on this subject the ingenuity of harding was at fault .
they must provide for their most pressing wants , settle their dwelling , and lay in a store of food ; thus the cold might come upon them before the question of clothes had been settled .
they must therefore make up their minds to pass this first winter without additional clothing .
when the fine season came round again , they would regularly hunt those musmons which had been seen on the expedition to mount franklin , and the wool once collected , the engineer would know how to make it into strong warm stuff ....
how ? he would consider .
" besides , " added gideon spilett , " lincoln island is not situated under a very high latitude , and probably the winters here are not severe .
did you not say , cyrus , that this thirty - fifth parallel corresponded to that of spain in the other hemisphere ? "
" doubtless , " replied the engineer , " but some winters in spain are very cold !
no want of snow and ice ; and perhaps lincoln island is just as rigourously tried .
however , it is an island , and as such , i hope that the temperature will be more moderate . "
" why , captain ? " asked herbert .
when winter comes , it restores this heat , which insures for the regions near the ocean a medium temperature , less high in summer , but less low in winter . "
" but i do n't want to bother myself about whether it will be cold or not .
one thing is certain , that is that the days are already short , and the evenings long .
" nothing is easier , " replied harding .
" to talk about ? " asked the sailor .
" to settle . "
" and when shall we begin ? "
" to - morrow , by having a seal hunt . "
" to make candles ? "
" yes . "
such was the engineer 's project ; and it was quite feasible , since he had lime and sulphuric acid , while the amphibians of the islet would furnish the fat necessary for the manufacture .
they were now at the 4th of june .
the next day , the 5th of june , in rather uncertain weather , they set out for the islet .
the seals were numerous , and the hunters , armed with their iron - tipped spears , easily killed half - a - dozen .
neb and pencroft skinned them , and only brought back to granite house their fat and skin , this skin being intended for the manufacture of boots .
the result of the hunt was this : nearly three hundred pounds of fat , all to be employed in the fabrication of candles .
the operation was extremely simple , and if it did not yield absolutely perfect results , they were at least very useful .
cyrus harding would only have had at his disposal sulphuric acid , but by heating this acid with the neutral fatty bodies he could separate the glycerine ; then from this new combination , he easily separated the olein , the margarin , and the stearin , by employing boiling water .
this operation did not last more than four and twenty hours .
the wicks , after several trials , were made of vegetable fibers , and dipped in the liquefied substance , they formed regular stearic candles , molded by the hand , which only wanted whiteness and polish .
they would not doubtless have the advantages of the wicks which are impregnated with boracic acid , and which vitrify as they burn and are entirely consumed , but cyrus harding having manufactured a beautiful pair of snuffers , these candles would be greatly appreciated during the long evenings in granite house .
during this month there was no want of work in the interior of their new dwelling .
scissors were made among other things , and the settlers were at last able to cut their hair , and also to shave , or at least trim their beards .
herbert had none , neb but little , but their companions were bristling in a way which justified the making of the said scissors .
the manufacture of a hand - saw cost infinite trouble , but at last an instrument was obtained which , when vigorously handled , could divide the ligneous fibers of the wood .
they then made tables , seats , cupboards , to furnish the principal rooms , and bedsteads , of which all the bedding consisted of grass mattresses .
the kitchen , with its shelves , on which rested the cooking utensils , its brick stove , looked very well , and neb worked away there as earnestly as if he was in a chemist 's laboratory .
but the joiners had soon to be replaced by carpenters .
in fact , the waterfall created by the explosion rendered the construction of two bridges necessary , one on prospect heights , the other on the shore .
now the plateau and the shore were transversely divided by a watercourse , which had to be crossed to reach the northern part of the island .
to avoid it the colonists had been obliged to make a considerable detour , by climbing up to the source of the red creek .
directly the bridges were established , neb and pencroft profited by them to go to the oyster - bed which had been discovered near the downs .
they dragged with them a sort of rough cart , which replaced the former inconvenient hurdle , and brought back some thousands of oysters , which soon increased among the rocks and formed a bed at the mouth of the mercy .
these molluscs were of excellent quality , and the colonists consumed some daily .
the settlers in lincoln island had still one privation .
on this day , as it was raining in torrents , the settlers were assembled in the great hall in granite house , when the lad cried out all at once,--
" look here , captain -- a grain of corn ! "
and he showed his companions a grain -- a single grain -- which from a hole in his pocket had got into the lining of his waistcoat .
the presence of this grain was explained by the fact that herbert , when at richmond , used to feed some pigeons , of which pencroft had made him a present .
" a grain of corn ? " said the engineer quickly .
" yes , captain ; but one , only one ! "
" well , my boy , " said pencroft , laughing , " we 're getting on capitally , upon my word !
what shall we make with one grain of corn ? "
" we will make bread of it , " replied cyrus harding .
" bread , cakes , tarts ! " replied the sailor .
" come , the bread that this grain of corn will make wo n't choke us very soon ! "
herbert , not attaching much importance to his discovery , was going to throw away the grain in question ; but harding took it , examined it , found that it was in good condition , and looking the sailor full in the face--"pencroft , " he asked quietly , " do you know how many ears one grain of corn can produce ? "
" one , i suppose ! " replied the sailor , surprised at the question .
" ten , pencroft !
and do you know how many grains one ear bears ? "
" no , upon my word . "
" about eighty ! " said cyrus harding .
there is the proportion . "
harding 's companions listened without answering .
these numbers astonished them .
they were exact , however .
" yes , my friends , " continued the engineer , " such are the arithmetical progressions of prolific nature ; and yet what is this multiplication of the grain of corn , of which the ear only bears eight hundred grains , compared to the poppy - plant , which bears thirty - two thousand seeds ; to the tobacco - plant , which produces three hundred and sixty thousand ?
in a few years , without the numerous causes of destruction , which arrests their fecundity , these plants would overrun the earth . "
but the engineer had not finished his lecture .
" and now , pencroft , " he continued , " do you know how many bushels four hundred thousand millions of grains would make ? "
" well , they would make more than three millions , at a hundred and thirty thousand a bushel , pencroft . "
" three millions ! " cried pencroft .
" three millions . "
" in four years ? "
" in four years , " replied cyrus harding , " and even in two years , if , as i hope , in this latitude we can obtain two crops a year . "
at that , according to his usual custom , pencroft could not reply otherwise than by a tremendous hurrah .
" so , herbert , " added the engineer , " you have made a discovery of great importance to us .
everything , my friends , everything can serve us in the condition in which we are .
" no , captain , no , we sha n't forget it , " replied pencroft ; " and if ever i find one of those tobacco - seeds , which multiply by three hundred and sixty thousand , i assure you i wo n't throw it away !
and now , what must we do ? "
" we must plant this grain , " replied herbert .
" yes , " added gideon spilett , " and with every possible care , for it bears in itself our future harvests . "
" provided it grows ! " cried the sailor .
" it will grow , " replied cyrus harding .
it was first proposed to plant it in a pot , but upon reflection it was decided to leave it to nature , and confide it to the earth .
this was done that very day , and it is needless to add , that every precaution was taken that the experiment might succeed .
from this time pencroft did not let a single day pass without going to visit what he gravely called his " corn - field . "
and woe to the insects which dared to venture there !
no mercy was shown them .
the next day , the 30th of june , the day which corresponds to the 31st of december in the northern year , was a friday .
neb remarked that the year finished on a bad day , but pencroft replied that naturally the next would begin on a good one , which was better .
at any rate it commenced by very severe cold .
ice accumulated at the mouth of the mercy , and it was not long before the whole expanse of the lake was frozen .
the settlers had frequently been obliged to renew their store of wood .
pencroft also had wisely not waited till the river was frozen , but had brought enormous rafts of wood to their destination .
the current was an indefatigable moving power , and it was employed in conveying the floating wood to the moment when the frost enchained it .
to the fuel which was so abundantly supplied by the forest , they added several cartloads of coal , which had to be brought from the foot of the spurs of mount franklin .
the powerful heat of the coal was greatly appreciated in the low temperature , which on the 4th of july fell to eight degrees of fahrenheit , that is , thirteen degrees below zero .
a second fireplace had been established in the dining - room , where they all worked together at their different avocations .
during this period of cold , cyrus harding had great cause to congratulate himself on having brought to granite house the little stream of water from lake grant .
taken below the frozen surface , and conducted through the passage , it preserved its fluidity , and arrived at an interior reservoir which had been hollowed out at the back part of the storeroom , while the overflow ran through the well to the sea .
about this time , the weather being extremely dry , the colonists , clothed as warmly as possible , resolved to devote a day to the exploration of that part of the island between the mercy and claw cape .
it was a wide extent of marshy land , and they would probably find good sport , for water - birds ought to swarm there .
as an unknown part of the island was about to be explored , the whole colony took part in the expedition .
accordingly , on the 5th of july , at six o'clock in the morning , when day had scarcely broken , cyrus harding , gideon spilett , herbert , neb , and pencroft , armed with spears , snares , bows and arrows , and provided with provisions , left granite house , preceded by top , who bounded before them .
their shortest way was to cross the mercy on the ice , which then covered it .
" but , " as the engineer justly observed , " that could not take the place of a regular bridge ! " so , the construction of a regular bridge was noted in the list of future works .
it was the first time that the settlers had set foot on the right bank of the mercy , and ventured into the midst of those gigantic and superb coniferae now sprinkled over with snow .
but they had not gone half a mile when from a thicket a whole family of quadrupeds , who had made a home there , disturbed by top , rushed forth into the open country .
" ah ! i should say those are foxes ! " cried herbert , when he saw the troop rapidly decamping .
they were foxes , but of a very large size , who uttered a sort of barking , at which top seemed to be very much astonished , for he stopped short in the chase , and gave the swift animals time to disappear .
so herbert was able , without hesitating , to give them their real name of " arctic foxes . "
they are frequently met with in chile , in the falkland islands , and in all parts of america traversed by the thirtieth and fortieth parallels .
herbert much regretted that top had not been able to catch one of these carnivora .
" are they good to eat ? " asked pencroft , who only regarded the representatives of the fauna in the island from one special point of view .
" no , " replied herbert ; " but zoologists have not yet found out if the eye of these foxes is diurnal or nocturnal , or whether it is correct to class them in the genus dog , properly so called . "
harding could not help smiling on hearing the lad 's reflection , which showed a thoughtful mind .
as to the sailor , from the moment when he found that the foxes were not classed in the genus eatable , they were nothing to him .
however , when a poultry - yard was established at granite house , he observed that it would be best to take some precautions against a probable visit from these four - legged plunderers , and no one disputed this .
after having turned the point , the settlers saw a long beach washed by the open sea .
a brilliant sun , but without any calorific action , was just issuing from the ocean .
the sea was as tranquil and blue as that of a mediterranean gulf , when the sky is clear .
claw cape , bent in the form of a yataghan , tapered away nearly four miles to the southeast .
they perceived by the tranquillity of the sea , in which no shallows troubled the waters , by its uniform color , which was stained by no yellow shades , by the absence of even a reef , that the coast was steep and that the ocean there covered a deep abyss .
behind in the west , but at a distance of four miles , rose the first trees of the forests of the far west .
they might have believed themselves to be on the desolate coast of some island in the antarctic regions which the ice had invaded .
while eating they looked around them .
" i believe that we should not have been able to reach it , " replied the engineer , " for the sea is deep , and there is not a rock on which we could have taken refuge .
before granite house , at least , there were sandbanks , an islet , which multiplied our chances of safety .
here , nothing but the depths ! "
" it is singular enough , " remarked spilett , " that this comparatively small island should present such varied ground .
this diversity of aspect , logically only belongs to continents of a certain extent .
one would really say , that the western part of lincoln island , so rich and so fertile , is washed by the warm waters of the gulf of mexico , and that its shores to the north and the southeast extend over a sort of arctic sea . "
" you are right , my dear spilett , " replied cyrus harding , " i have also observed this .
" what ! a continent in the middle of the pacific ? " cried pencroft .
" why not ? " replied cyrus harding .
to my mind , it is quite possible that all these islands , emerging from this vast ocean , are but the summits of a continent , now submerged , but which was above the waters at a prehistoric period . "
" as the atlantis was formerly , " replied herbert .
" yes , my boy ... if , however , it existed . "
" and would lincoln island have been a part of that continent ? " asked pencroft .
" it is probable , " replied cyrus harding , " and that would sufficiently , explain the variety of productions which are seen on its surface . "
" and the great number of animals which still inhabit it , " added herbert .
" yes , my boy , " replied the engineer , " and you furnish me with an argument to support my theory .
it is certain , after what we have seen , that animals are numerous in this island , and what is more strange , that the species are extremely varied .
there is a reason for that , and to me it is that lincoln island may have formerly been a part of some vast continent which had gradually sunk below the pacific . "
" then , some fine day , " said pencroft , who did not appear to be entirely convinced , " the rest of this ancient continent may disappear in its turn , and there will be nothing between america and asia . "
" yes , " replied harding , " there will be new continents which millions and millions of animalculae are building at this moment . "
" and what are these masons ? " asked pencroft .
" coral insects , " replied cyrus harding .
formerly , at the first periods of creation , nature employing fire , heaved up the land , but now she entrusts to these microscopic creatures the task of replacing this agent , of which the dynamic power in the interior of the globe has evidently diminished -- which is proved by the number of volcanoes on the surface of the earth , now actually extinct .
and i believe that centuries succeeding to centuries , and insects to insects , this pacific may one day be changed into a vast continent , which new generations will inhabit and civilize in their turn . "
" that will take a long time , " said pencroft .
" nature has time for it , " replied the engineer .
" but what would be the use of new continents ? " asked herbert .
" it appears to me that the present extent of habitable countries is sufficient for humanity .
" nothing uselessly , certainly , " replied the engineer , " but this is how the necessity of new continents for the future , and exactly on the tropical zone occupied by the coral islands , may be explained .
at least to me this explanation appears plausible . "
" we are listening , captain , " said herbert .
" this is my idea : philosophers generally admit that some day our globe will end , or rather that animal and vegetable life will no longer be possible , because of the intense cold to which it will be subjected .
what they are not agreed upon , is the cause of this cold .
some think that it will arise from the falling of the temperature , which the sun will experience after millions of years ; others , from the gradual extinction of the fires in the interior of our globe , which have a greater influence on it than is generally supposed .
i hold to this last hypothesis , grounding it on the fact that the moon is really a cold star , which is no longer habitable , although the sun continues to throw on its surface the same amount of heat .
if , then , the moon has become cold , it is because the interior fires to which , as do all the stars of the stellar world , it owes its origin , are completely extinct .
lastly , whatever may be the cause , our globe will become cold some day , but this cold will only operate gradually .
what will happen , then ?
the temperate zones , at a more or less distant period , will not be more habitable than the polar regions now are .
then the population of men , as well as the animals , will flow towards the latitudes which are more directly under the solar influence .
the laplanders and the samoides will find the climate of the polar regions on the shores of the mediterranean .
who can say , that at this period , the equatorial regions will not be too small , to contain and nourish terrestrial humanity ?
now , may not provident nature , so as to give refuge to all the vegetable and animal emigration , be at present laying the foundation of a new continent under the equator , and may she not have entrusted these insects with the construction of it ?
i have often thought of all these things , my friends , and i seriously believe that the aspect of our globe will some day be completely changed ; that by the raising of new continents the sea will cover the old , and that , in future ages , a columbus will go to discover the islands of chimborazo , of the himalayas , or of mont blanc , remains of a submerged america , asia , and europe .
perhaps then , our spheroid will rest -- will be left to death -- to revive some day under superior conditions !
but all that , my friends , is the secret of the author of all things ; and beginning by the work of the insects , i have perhaps let myself be carried too far , in investigating the secrets of the future .
" my dear cyrus , " replied spilett , " these theories are prophecies to me , and they will be accomplished some day . "
" that is the secret of god , " said the engineer .
" all that is well and good , " then said pencroft , who had listened with all his might , " but will you tell me , captain , if lincoln island has been made by your insects ? "
" no , " replied harding ; " it is of a purely volcanic origin . "
" then it will disappear some day ? "
" that is probable . "
" i hope we wo n't be here then . "
" no , do n't be uneasy , pencroft ; we shall not be here then , as we have no wish to die here , and hope to get away some time . "
" in the meantime , " replied gideon spilett , " let us establish ourselves here as if forever .
there is no use in doing things by halves . "
this ended the conversation .
breakfast was finished , the exploration was continued , and the settlers arrived at the border of the marshy region .
it was a marsh of which the extent , to the rounded coast which terminated the island at the southeast , was about twenty square miles .
the soil was formed of clayey flint - earth , mingled with vegetable matter , such as the remains of rushes , reeds , grass , etc .
it was also to be feared that during the heat miasmas would arise , which might produce fevers .
above the aquatic plants , on the surface of the stagnant water , fluttered numbers of birds .
wild duck , teal , snipe lived there in flocks , and those fearless birds allowed themselves to be easily approached .
the explorers were , however , obliged to content themselves with bows and arrows .
the result was less , but the silent arrow had the advantage of not frightening the birds , while the noise of firearms would have dispersed them to all parts of the marsh .
the hunters were satisfied , for this time , with a dozen ducks , which had white bodies with a band of cinnamon , a green head , wings black , white , and red , and flattened beak . herbert called them tadorns .
top helped in the capture of these birds , whose name was given to this marshy part of the island .
about five o'clock in the evening cyrus harding and his companions retraced their steps to their dwelling by traversing tadorn 's fens , and crossed the mercy on the ice - bridge .
at eight in the evening they all entered granite house .
this intense cold lasted till the 15th of august , without , however , passing the degree of fahrenheit already mentioned .
when the atmosphere was calm , the low temperature was easily borne , but when the wind blew , the poor settlers , insufficiently clothed , felt it severely .
" bears , " said he , " are generally very well dressed , and i ask no more than to borrow for the winter the warm cloaks which they have on their backs . "
" but , " replied neb , laughing , " perhaps the bears would not consent to give you their cloaks , pencroft .
these beasts are not st . martins . "
but these formidable carnivora did not exist in the island , or at any rate they had not yet shown themselves .
in the meanwhile , herbert , pencroft , and the reporter occupied themselves with making traps on prospect heights and at the border of the forest .
according to the sailor , any animal , whatever it was , would be a lawful prize , and the rodents or carnivora which might get into the new snares would be well received at granite house .
the traps were besides extremely simple ; being pits dug in the ground , a platform of branches and grass above , which concealed the opening , and at the bottom some bait , the scent of which would attract animals .
it must be mentioned also , that they had not been dug at random , but at certain places where numerous footprints showed that quadrupeds frequented the ground .
they were visited every day , and at three different times , during the first days , specimens of those antarctic foxes which they had already seen on the right bank of the mercy were found in them .
" why , there are nothing but foxes in this country ! " cried pencroft , when for the third time he drew one of the animals out of the pit .
looking at it in great disgust , he added , " beasts which are good for nothing ! "
" yes , " said gideon spilett , " they are good for something ! "
" and what is that ? "
" to make bait to attract other creatures ! "
the reporter was right , and the traps were henceforward baited with the foxes carcasses .
the sailor had also made snares from the long tough fibers of a certain plant , and they were even more successful than the traps .
rarely a day passed without some rabbits from the warren being caught .
it was always rabbit , but neb knew how to vary his sauces and the settlers did not think of complaining .
however , once or twice in the second week of august , the traps supplied the hunters with other animals more useful than foxes , namely , several of those small wild boars which had already been seen to the north of the lake .
" but these are not pigs , " said herbert to him , " i warn you of that , pencroft . "
" my boy , " replied the sailor , bending over the trap and drawing out one of these representatives of the family of sus by the little appendage which served it as a tail . " let me believe that these are pigs . "
" why ? "
" because that pleases me ! "
" are you very fond of pig then , pencroft ? "
these peccaries generally live in herds , and it was probable that they abounded in the woody parts of the island .
at any rate , they were eatable from head to foot , and pencroft did not ask more from them .
towards the 15th of august , the state of the atmosphere was suddenly moderated by the wind shifting to the northwest .
the temperature rose some degrees , and the accumulated vapor in the air was not long in resolving into snow .
all the island was covered with a sheet of white , and showed itself to its inhabitants under a new aspect .
the snow fell abundantly for several days , and it soon reached a thickness of two feet .
the wind also blew with great violence , and at the height of granite house the sea could be heard thundering against the reefs .
in some places , the wind , eddying round the corners , formed the snow into tall whirling columns , resembling those waterspouts which turn round on their base , and which vessels attack with a shot from a gun .
however , the storm , coming from the northwest , blew across the island , and the position of granite house preserved it from a direct attack .
but in the midst of this snow - storm , as terrible as if it had been produced in some polar country , neither cyrus harding nor his companions could , notwithstanding their wish for it , venture forth , and they remained shut up for five days , from the 20th to the 25th of august .
they could hear the tempest raging in jacamar wood , which would surely suffer from it .
" the wind is turning woodman , let it alone , " he repeated .
besides , there was no way of stopping it , if they had wished to do so .
how grateful the inhabitants of granite house then were to heaven for having prepared for them this solid and immovable retreat !
cyrus harding had also his legitimate share of thanks , but after all , it was nature who had hollowed out this vast cavern , and he had only discovered it .
there all were in safety , and the tempest could not reach them .
if they had constructed a house of bricks and wood on prospect heights , it certainly would not have resisted the fury of this storm .
but here , in granite house , in the middle of a solid mass , over which neither the sea nor air had any influence , there was nothing to fear .
during these days of seclusion the settlers did not remain inactive .
there was no want of wood , cut up into planks , in the storeroom , and little by little they completed their furnishing ; constructing the most solid of tables and chairs , for material was not spared .
then the carpenters became basket - makers , and they did not succeed badly in this new manufacture .
at the point of the lake which projected to the north , they had discovered an osier - bed in which grew a large number of purple osiers .
before the rainy season , pencroft and herbert had cut down these useful shrubs , and their branches , well prepared , could now be effectively employed .
the first attempts were somewhat crude , but in consequence of the cleverness and intelligence of the workmen , by consulting , and recalling the models which they had seen , and by emulating each other , the possessions of the colony were soon increased by several baskets of different sizes .
the storeroom was provided with them , and in special baskets neb placed his collection of rhizomes , stone - pine almonds , etc .
during the last week of the month of august the weather moderated again .
there was certainly two feet of snow on the shore , but they were able to walk without much difficulty on the hardened surface .
cyrus harding and his companions climbed prospect heights .
what a change !
the woods , which they had left green , especially in the part at which the firs predominated , had disappeared under a uniform color .
all was white , from the summit of mount franklin to the shore , the forests , the plains , the lake , the river .
the waters of the mercy flowed under a roof of ice , which , at each rising and ebbing of the tide , broke up with loud crashes .
numerous birds fluttered over the frozen surface of the lake .
ducks and snipe , teal and guillemots were assembled in thousands .
one might have said that the water escaped by a monstrous gargoyle , shaped with all the imagination of an artist of the renaissance .
as to the damage caused by the storm in the forest , that could not as yet be ascertained ; they would have to wait till the snowy covering was dissipated .
no animal had fallen into them , and yet the footprints in the neighborhood were very numerous , among others , certain very clear marks of claws .
herbert did not hesitate to affirm that some animal of the feline species had passed there , which justified the engineer 's opinion that dangerous beasts existed in lincoln island .
" on the new continent , " replied the lad , " they are found from mexico to the pampas of buenos aires .
now , as lincoln island is nearly under the same latitude as the provinces of la plata , it is not surprising that tigers are to be met with in it . "
" well , we must look out for them , " replied pencroft .
however , the snow soon disappeared , quickly dissolving under the influence of the rising temperature .
rain fell , and the sheet of white soon vanished .
this necessitated several excursions into the forest , and they found that a great number of trees had been blown down by the last hurricane .
a visit was also paid to the chimneys , and the settlers could not but congratulate themselves on not having been living there during the hurricane .
the sea had left unquestionable traces of its ravages .
sweeping over the islet , it had furiously assailed the passages , half filling them with sand , while thick beds of seaweed covered the rocks .
while neb , herbert , and pencroft hunted or collected wood , cyrus harding and gideon spilett busied themselves in putting the chimneys to rights , and they found the forge and the bellows almost unhurt , protected as they had been from the first by the heaps of sand .
the store of fuel had not been made uselessly .
the settlers had not done with the rigorous cold .
about the 25th , after another change from snow to rain , the wind shifted to the southeast , and the cold became , suddenly , very severe .
according to the engineer 's calculation , the mercurial column of a fahrenheit thermometer would not have marked less than eight degrees below zero , and this intense cold , rendered still more painful by a sharp gale , lasted for several days .
the colonists were again shut up in granite house , and as it was necessary to hermetically seal all the openings of the facade , only leaving a narrow passage for renewing the air , the consumption of candles was considerable .
to economize them , the cavern was often only lighted by the blazing hearths , on which fuel was not spared .
several times , one or other of the settlers descended to the beach in the midst of ice which the waves heaped up at each tide , but they soon climbed up again to granite house , and it was not without pain and difficulty that their hands could hold to the rounds of the ladder .
in consequence of the intense cold , their fingers felt as if burned when they touched the rounds .
we know that the settlers had no other sugar at their disposal than the liquid substance which they drew from the maple , by making deep incisions in the tree .
they contented themselves with collecting this liquor in jars and employing it in this state for different culinary purposes , and the more so , as on growing old , this liquid began to become white and to be of a syrupy consistence .
but there was something better to be made of it , and one day cyrus harding announced that they were going to turn into refiners .
" refiners ! " replied pencroft .
" that is rather a warm trade , i think . "
" very warm , " answered the engineer .
" then it will be seasonable ! " said the sailor .
this word refining need not awake in the mind thoughts of an elaborate manufactory with apparatus and numerous workmen .
no ! to crystallize this liquor , only an extremely easy operation is required .
placed on the fire in large earthen pots , it was simply subjected to evaporation , and soon a scum arose to its surface .
as soon as this began to thicken , neb carefully removed it with a wooden spatula ; this accelerated the evaporation , and at the same time prevented it from contracting an empyreumatic flavor .
after boiling for several hours on a hot fire , which did as much good to the operators as the substance operated upon , the latter was transformed into a thick syrup .
this syrup was poured into clay molds , previously fabricated in the kitchen stove , and to which they had given various shapes .
the next day this syrup had become cold , and formed cakes and tablets .
this was sugar of rather a reddish color , but nearly transparent and of a delicious taste .
the cold continued to the middle of september , and the prisoners in granite house began to find their captivity rather tedious .
nearly every day they attempted sorties which they could not prolong .
they constantly worked at the improvement of their dwelling .
harding instructed his companions in many things , principally explaining to them the practical applications of science .
the time thus passed away pleasantly , these brave men not appearing to have any fears for the future .
if only they had been clothed in a way to meet it , how many excursions they would have attempted , either to the downs or to tadorn 's fens !
game would have been easily approached , and the chase would certainly have been most productive .
but cyrus harding considered it of importance that no one should injure his health , for he had need of all his hands , and his advice was followed .
but it must be said , that the one who was most impatient of this imprisonment , after pencroft perhaps , was top .
the faithful dog found granite house very narrow .
he ran backwards and forwards from one room to another , showing in his way how weary he was of being shut up .
the engineer observed this maneuver several times .
what could there be in this abyss to make such an impression on the intelligent animal ?
the well led to the sea , that was certain .
could narrow passages spread from it through the foundations of the island ?
did some marine monster come from time to time , to breathe at the bottom of this well ?
the engineer did not know what to think , and could not refrain from dreaming of many strange improbabilities .
accustomed to go far into the regions of scientific reality , he would not allow himself to be drawn into the regions of the strange and almost of the supernatural ; but yet how to explain why top , one of those sensible dogs who never waste their time in barking at the moon , should persist in trying with scent and hearing to fathom this abyss , if there was nothing there to cause his uneasiness ?
top 's conduct puzzled cyrus harding even more than he cared to acknowledge to himself .
at all events , the engineer only communicated his impressions to gideon spilett , for he thought it useless to explain to his companions the suspicions which arose from what perhaps was only top 's fancy .
at last the cold ceased .
there had been rain , squalls mingled with snow , hailstorms , gusts of wind , but these inclemencies did not last .
they hunted much in the second part of september , which led pencroft to again entreat for the firearms , which he asserted had been promised by cyrus harding .
but the obstinate sailor would listen to nothing of this , and he would give the engineer no peace till he promised to satisfy his desire .
gideon spilett , however , supported pencroft .
" if , which may be doubted , " said he , " the island is inhabited by wild beasts , we must think how to fight with and exterminate them .
a time may come when this will be our first duty . "
but at this period , it was not the question of firearms which occupied harding , but that of clothes .
those which the settlers wore had passed this winter , but they would not last until next winter .
but this needed settled weather , and a month must pass before this exploration could be profitably undertaken .
they therefore waited with some impatience , when an incident occurred which increased the desire the settlers had to visit the whole of their domain .
it was the 24th of october .
they were a female peccary and her two young ones .
pencroft then returned to granite house , enchanted with his capture , and , as usual , he made a great show of his game .
" come , we shall have a grand feast , captain ! " he exclaimed .
" and you too , mr . spilett , you will eat some ! "
" suckling - pig . "
" oh , indeed , suckling - pig , pencroft ?
to hear you , i thought that you were bringing back a young partridge stuffed with truffles ! "
" what ? " cried pencroft .
" no , " replied gideon spilett , without showing any enthusiasm ; " provided one does n't eat too much . "
" that 's right , that 's right , " returned the sailor , who was not pleased whenever he heard his chase made light of . " you like to make objections .
seven months ago , when we landed on the island , you would have been only too glad to have met with such game ! "
" well , well , " replied the reporter , " man is never perfect , nor contented . "
" now , " said pencroft , " i hope that neb will distinguish himself .
i will look after the cooking myself . "
and the sailor , followed by neb , entered the kitchen , where they were soon absorbed in their culinary labors .
they were allowed to do it in their own way .
at five o'clock dinner was served in the dining - room of granite house .
the kangaroo soup was smoking on the table .
to the soup succeeded the peccaries , which pencroft insisted on carving himself , and of which he served out monstrous portions to each of the guests .
these suckling - pigs were really delicious , and pencroft was devouring his share with great gusto , when all at once a cry and an oath escaped him .
" what 's the matter ? " asked cyrus harding .
" the matter ? the matter is that i have just broken a tooth ! " replied the sailor .
" what , are there pebbles in your peccaries ? " said gideon spilett .
" i suppose so , " replied pencroft , drawing from his lips the object which had cost him a grinder-- !
it was not a pebble -- it was a leaden bullet .
part 2
abandoned
chapter 1
it was now exactly seven months since the balloon voyagers had been thrown on lincoln island .
during that time , notwithstanding the researches they had made , no human being had been discovered .
and now , all this scaffolding of reasonings fell before a simple ball of metal , found in the body of an inoffensive rodent !
in fact , this bullet must have issued from a firearm , and who but a human being could have used such a weapon ?
when pencroft had placed the bullet on the table , his companions looked at it with intense astonishment .
all the consequences likely to result from this incident , notwithstanding its apparent insignificance , immediately took possession of their minds .
the sudden apparition of a supernatural being could not have startled them more completely .
he took the bullet , turned it over and over , rolled it between his finger and thumb ; then , turning to pencroft , he asked,--
" are you sure that the peccary wounded by this bullet was not more than three months old ? "
" not more , captain , " replied pencroft .
" it was still sucking its mother when i found it in the trap . "
" and that a bullet , " added gideon spilett , " wounded , though not mortally , this little animal . "
" that is unquestionable , " said cyrus harding , " and these are the deductions which must be drawn from this incident : that the island was inhabited before our arrival , or that men have landed here within three months .
did these men arrive here voluntarily or involuntarily , by disembarking on the shore or by being wrecked ?
this point can only be cleared up later .
as to what they were , europeans or malays , enemies or friends of our race , we can not possibly guess ; and if they still inhabit the island , or if they have left it , we know not .
but these questions are of too much importance to be allowed to remain long unsettled . "
" no ! a hundred times no ! a thousand times no ! " cried the sailor , springing up from the table .
" there are no other men than ourselves on lincoln island !
by my faith !
" in fact , the contrary would be very astonishing , " said herbert .
" but it would be much more astonishing , i should think , " observed the reporter , " if this peccary had been born with a bullet in its inside ! "
" at least , " said neb seriously , " if pencroft has not had-- "
" look here , neb , " burst out pencroft .
" do you think i could have a bullet in my jaw for five or six months without finding it out ?
" look well , neb , and if you find one hollow tooth in this set , i will let you pull out half a dozen ! "
" neb 's supposition is certainly inadmissible , " replied harding , who , notwithstanding the gravity of his thoughts , could not restrain a smile .
it is therefore , probable that within only a few weeks castaways have been thrown by a storm on some part of the coast .
however that may be , it is of consequence to us to have this point settled . "
" i think that we should act with caution , " said the reporter .
" such is my advice , " replied cyrus harding , " for it is to be feared that malay pirates have landed on the island ! "
" captain , " asked the sailor , " would it not be a good plan , before setting out , to build a canoe in which we could either ascend the river , or , if we liked , coast round the inland ?
it will not do to be unprovided . "
" yes , a real boat , " replied the sailor ; " but we do not want one for a sea voyage , and in five days at the most , i will undertake to construct a canoe fit to navigate the mercy . "
" five days , " cried neb , " to build a boat ? "
" yes , neb ; a boat in the indian fashion . "
" of wood ? " asked the negro , looking still unconvinced .
" of wood , " replied pencroft , " of rather of bark .
i repeat , captain , that in five days the work will be finished ! "
" in five days , then , be it , " replied the engineer .
" but till that time we must be very watchful , " said herbert .
" very watchful indeed , my friends , " replied harding ; " and i beg you to confine your hunting excursions to the neighborhood of granite house . "
the dinner ended less gaily than pencroft had hoped .
so , then , the island was , or had been , inhabited by others than the settlers .
proved as it was by the incident of the bullet , it was hereafter an unquestionable fact , and such a discovery could not but cause great uneasiness among the colonists .
cyrus harding and gideon spilett , before sleeping , conversed long about the matter .
they asked themselves if by chance this incident might not have some connection with the inexplicable way in which the engineer had been saved , and the other peculiar circumstances which had struck them at different times .
however , cyrus harding , after having discussed the pros and cons of the question , ended by saying,--
" in short , would you like to know my opinion , my dear spilett ? "
" yes , cyrus . "
" well , then , it is this : however minutely we explore the island , we shall find nothing . "
the next day pencroft set to work .
he did not mean to build a boat with boards and planking , but simply a flat - bottomed canoe , which would be well suited for navigating the mercy -- above all , for approaching its source , where the water would naturally be shallow .
pieces of bark , fastened one to the other , would form a light boat ; and in case of natural obstacles , which would render a portage necessary , it would be easily carried .
it was first necessary to select the trees which would afford a strong and supple bark for the work .
now the last storm had brought down a number of large birch - trees , the bark of which would be perfectly suited for their purpose .
some of these trees lay on the ground , and they had only to be barked , which was the most difficult thing of all , owing to the imperfect tools which the settlers possessed .
while the sailor , seconded by the engineer , thus occupied himself without losing an hour , gideon spilett and herbert were not idle .
they were made purveyors to the colony .
the reporter could not but admire the boy , who had acquired great skill in handling the bow and spear .
herbert also showed great courage and much of that presence of mind which may justly be called " the reasoning of bravery . "
often during these excursions , herbert talked with gideon spilett on the incident of the bullet , and the deductions which the engineer drew from it , and one day -- it was the 26th of october -- he said--"but , mr . spilett , do you not think it very extraordinary that , if any castaways have landed on the island , they have not yet shown themselves near granite house ? "
" very astonishing if they are still here , " replied the reporter , " but not astonishing at all if they are here no longer ! "
" so you think that these people have already quitted the island ? " returned herbert .
" it is more than probable , my boy ; for if their stay was prolonged , and above all , if they were still here , some accident would have at last betrayed their presence . "
" but if they were able to go away , " observed the lad , " they could not have been castaways . "
" no , herbert ; or , at least , they were what might be called provisional castaways .
" i must acknowledge one thing , " said herbert , " it is that captain harding appears rather to fear than desire the presence of human beings on our island . "
" in short , " responded the reporter , " there are only malays who frequent these seas , and those fellows are ruffians which it is best to avoid . "
" i do not say no , my boy .
a deserted camp , the ashes of a fire , would put us on the track , and this is what we will look for in our next expedition . "
the day on which the hunters spoke thus , they were in a part of the forest near the mercy , remarkable for its beautiful trees .
there , among others , rose , to a height of nearly 200 feet above the ground , some of those superb coniferae , to which , in new zealand , the natives give the name of kauris .
" the idea is good , " replied the reporter ; " but could you climb to the top of those giants ? "
" i can at least try , " replied herbert .
the light and active boy then sprang on the first branches , the arrangement of which made the ascent of the kauri easy , and in a few minutes he arrived at the summit , which emerged from the immense plain of verdure .
from this elevated situation his gaze extended over all the southern portion of the island , from claw cape on the southeast , to reptile end on the southwest .
to the northwest rose mount franklin , which concealed a great part of the horizon .
but herbert , from the height of his observatory , could examine all the yet unknown portion of the island , which might have given shelter to the strangers whose presence they suspected .
however , as the bank of trees hid the shore , it was possible that a vessel , especially if deprived of her masts , might lie close to the land and thus be invisible to herbert .
neither in the forests of the far west was anything to be seen .
the wood formed an impenetrable screen , measuring several square miles , without a break or an opening .
it was impossible even to follow the course of the mercy , or to ascertain in what part of the mountain it took its source .
perhaps other creeks also ran towards the west , but they could not be seen .
but at last , if all indication of an encampment escaped herbert 's sight could he not even catch a glimpse of smoke , the faintest trace of which would be easily discernible in the pure atmosphere ?
for an instant herbert thought he could perceive a slight smoke in the west , but a more attentive examination showed that he was mistaken .
he strained his eyes in every direction , and his sight was excellent . no , decidedly there was nothing there .
herbert descended to the foot of the kauri , and the two sportsmen returned to granite house .
there cyrus harding listened to the lad 's account , shook his head and said nothing .
it was very evident that no decided opinion could be pronounced on this question until after a complete exploration of the island .
two days after -- the 28th of october -- another incident occurred , for which an explanation was again required .
while strolling along the shore about two miles from granite house , herbert and neb were fortunate enough to capture a magnificent specimen of the order of chelonia .
herbert caught sight of this turtle as it was crawling among the rocks to reach the sea .
" help , neb , help ! " he cried .
neb ran up .
" what a fine animal ! " said neb ; " but how are we to catch it ? "
" nothing is easier , neb , " replied herbert .
" we have only to turn the turtle on its back , and it can not possibly get away .
take your spear and do as i do . "
herbert and neb then drove their sticks underneath the animal , and by their united efforts managed without difficulty to turn it on its back .
at this moment the creature 's head could be seen , which was small , flat , but widened behind by the large temporal fossae hidden under the long roof .
" and now , what shall we do with our prize ? " said neb .
" we ca n't drag it to granite house ! "
" leave it here , since it can not turn over , " replied herbert , " and we will come back with the cart to fetch it . "
" that is the best plan . "
however , for greater precaution , herbert took the trouble , which neb deemed superfluous , to wedge up the animal with great stones ; after which the two hunters returned to granite house , following the beach , which the tide had left uncovered .
herbert , wishing to surprise pencroft , said nothing about the " superb specimen of a chelonian " which they had turned over on the sand ; but , two hours later , he and neb returned with the cart to the place where they had left it .
the " superb specimen of a chelonian " was no longer there !
neb and herbert stared at each other first ; then they stared about them .
it was just at this spot that the turtle had been left .
the lad even found the stones which he had used , and therefore he was certain of not being mistaken .
" well ! " said neb , " these beasts can turn themselves over , then ? ' '
" it appears so , " replied herbert , who could not understand it at all , and was gazing at the stones scattered on the sand .
" well , pencroft will be disgusted ! "
" and captain harding will perhaps be very perplexed how to explain this disappearance , " thought herbert .
" look here , " said neb , who wished to hide his ill - luck , " we wo n't speak about it . "
" on the contrary , neb , we must speak about it , " replied herbert .
and the two , taking the cart , which there was now no use for , returned to granite house .
arrived at the dockyard , where the engineer and the sailor were working together , herbert recounted what had happened .
" oh ! the stupids ! " cried the sailor , " to have let at least fifty meals escape ! "
" but , pencroft , " replied neb , " it was n't our fault that the beast got away ; as i tell you , we had turned it over on its back ! "
" then you did n't turn it over enough ! " returned the obstinate sailor .
and he told how he had taken care to wedge up the turtle with stones .
" it is a miracle , then ! " replied pencroft .
" i thought , captain , " said herbert , " that turtles , once placed on their backs , could not regain their feet , especially when they are of a large size ? '
" that is true , my boy , " replied cyrus harding .
" then how did it manage ? "
" at what distance from the sea did you leave this turtle ? " asked the engineer , who , having suspended his work , was reflecting on this incident .
" fifteen feet at the most , " replied herbert .
" and the tide was low at the time ? "
" yes , captain . "
" well , " replied the engineer , " what the turtle could not do on the sand it might have been able to do in the water .
it turned over when the tide overtook it , and then quietly returned to the deep sea . "
" oh ! what stupids we were ! " cried neb .
" that is precisely what i had the honor of telling you before ! " returned the sailor .
cyrus harding had given this explanation , which , no doubt , was admissible .
but was he himself convinced of the accuracy of this explanation ?
it can not be said that he was .
chapter 2
on the 9th of october the bark canoe was entirely finished .
a seat in the stern , a second seat in the middle to preserve the equilibrium , a third seat in the bows , rowlocks for the two oars , a scull to steer with , completed the little craft , which was twelve feet long , and did not weigh more than two hundred pounds .
pencroft , who leaped in directly , maneuvered it with the scull and declared it to be just the thing for the purpose to which they wished to put it .
" hurrah ! " cried the sailor , who did not disdain to celebrate thus his own triumph .
" with this we could go round-- "
" the world ? " asked gideon spilett .
" no , the island .
some stones for ballast , a mast and a sail , which the captain will make for us some day , and we shall go splendidly !
come along ! we must see if it will carry all five of us ! "
this was certainly a trial which ought to be made .
pencroft soon brought the canoe to the shore by a narrow passage among the rocks , and it was agreed that they should make a trial of the boat that day by following the shore as far as the first point at which the rocks of the south ended .
as they embarked , neb cried,--
" but your boat leaks rather , pencroft . "
" that 's nothing , neb , " replied the sailor ; " the wood will get seasoned .
jump in ! "
they were soon all seated , and pencroft shoved off .
the weather was magnificent , the sea as calm as if its waters were contained within the narrow limits of a lake . thus the boat could proceed with as much security as if it was ascending the tranquil current of the mercy .
neb took one of the oars , herbert the other , and pencroft remained in the stern in order to use the scull .
the sailor first crossed the channel , and steered close to the southern point of the islet .
the boat then skirted the shore , which , extending to the extreme point , hid all tadorn 's fens .
this point , of which the distance was increased by the irregularity of the coast , was nearly three miles from the mercy .
the settlers resolved to go to its extremity , and only go beyond it as much as was necessary to take a rapid survey of the coast as far as claw cape .
the cliff gradually sloped away from the mouth of the river to the point .
this was formed of granite rocks , capriciously distributed , very different from the cliff at prospect heights , and of an extremely wild aspect .
it might have been said that an immense cartload of rocks had been emptied out there .
the canoe , impelled by the two oars , advanced without difficulty .
gideon spilett , pencil in one hand and notebook in the other , sketched the coast in bold strokes .
neb , herbert , and pencroft chatted , while examining this part of their domain , which was new to them , and , in proportion as the canoe proceeded towards the south , the two mandible capes appeared to move , and surround union bay more closely .
in the meantime , after a voyage of three - quarters of an hour , the canoe reached the extremity of the point , and pencroft was preparing to return , when herbert , rising , pointed to a black object , saying,--
" what do i see down there on the beach ? "
all eyes turned towards the point indicated .
" why , " said the reporter , " there is something .
it looks like part of a wreck half buried in the sand . "
" ah ! " cried pencroft , " i see what it is ! "
" what ? " asked neb .
" barrels , barrels , which perhaps are full , " replied the sailor .
" pull to the shore , pencroft ! " said cyrus .
a few strokes of the oar brought the canoe into a little creek , and its passengers leaped on shore .
pencroft was not mistaken .
two barrels were there , half buried in the sand , but still firmly attached to a large chest , which , sustained by them , had floated to the moment when it stranded on the beach .
" there has been a wreck , then , in some part of the island , " said herbert .
" but what 's in this chest ? " cried pencroft , with very natural impatience .
it is shut up , and nothing to open it with !
well , perhaps a stone-- "
and the sailor , raising a heavy block , was about to break in one of the sides of the chest , when the engineer arrested his hand .
" pencroft , " said he , " can you restrain your impatience for one hour only ? "
" we shall find that out , pencroft , " replied the engineer ; " but trust to me , and do not break the chest , which may be useful to us .
we must convey it to granite house , where we can open it easily , and without breaking it .
" you are right , captain , and i was wrong , as usual , " replied the sailor .
the engineer 's advice was good .
in fact , the canoe probably would not have been able to contain the articles possibly enclosed in the chest , which doubtless was heavy , since two empty barrels were required to buoy it up .
it was , therefore , much better to tow it to the beach at granite house .
and now , whence had this chest come ?
that was the important question .
herbert and neb climbed a high rock to survey the sea , but there was nothing in sight -- neither a dismasted vessel nor a ship under sail .
however , there was no doubt that there had been a wreck .
perhaps this incident was connected with that of the bullet ?
perhaps strangers had landed on another part of the island ?
but the thought which came naturally to the settlers was , that these strangers could not be malay pirates , for the chest was evidently of american or european make .
all the party returned to the chest , which was of an unusually large size .
it was made of oak wood , very carefully closed and covered with a thick hide , which was secured by copper nails .
the two great barrels , hermetically sealed , but which sounded hollow and empty , were fastened to its sides by strong ropes , knotted with a skill which pencroft directly pronounced sailors alone could exhibit .
the water did not appear to have penetrated to the inside , and the articles which it contained were no doubt uninjured .
it was evident that this chest had been thrown overboard from some dismasted vessel driven towards the island , and that , in the hope that it would reach the land , where they might afterwards find it , the passengers had taken the precaution to buoy it up by means of this floating apparatus .
if we find no one-- "
" we will keep it for ourselves ! " cried pencroft .
" but what in the world can there be in it ? "
pencroft and neb then dug away the sand with their oars , so as to facilitate the moving of the chest , towing which the boat soon began to double the point , to which the name of flotsam point was given .
but happily his fears were not realized , and an hour and a half after they set out -- all that time had been taken up in going a distance of three miles -- the boat touched the beach below granite house .
" i hope not , " replied the reporter .
" if only there was-- " said the sailor in a low voice .
" what ? " asked neb , who overheard him .
" nothing ! "
the covering of zinc was torn off and thrown back over the sides of the chest , and by degrees numerous articles of very varied character were produced and strewn about on the sand .
at each new object pencroft uttered fresh hurrahs , herbert clapped his hands , and neb danced up and down .
" it must be allowed , " said the reporter , after the inventory had been made , " that the owner of this chest was a practical man !
it might really be said that he expected to be wrecked , and had prepared for it beforehand . "
" nothing is wanting , indeed , " murmured cyrus harding thoughtfully .
" and for a certainty , " added herbert , " the vessel which carried this chest and its owner was not a malay pirate ! "
" unless , " said pencroft , " the owner had been taken prisoner by pirates-- "
" that is not admissible , " replied the reporter .
" it is more probable that an american or european vessel has been driven into this quarter , and that her passengers , wishing to save necessaries at least , prepared this chest and threw it overboard . "
" is that your opinion , captain ? " asked herbert .
" yes , my boy , " replied the engineer , " that may have been the case .
it is possible that at the moment , or in expectation of a wreck , they collected into this chest different articles of the greatest use in hopes of finding it again on the coast-- "
" even the photographic box ! " exclaimed the sailor incredulously .
" as to that apparatus , " replied harding , " i do not quite see the use of it ; and a more complete supply of clothes or more abundant ammunition would have been more valuable to us as well as to any other castaways ! "
" but is n't there any mark or direction on these instruments , tools , or books , which would tell us something about them ? " asked gideon spilett .
that might be ascertained .
each article was carefully examined , especially the books , instruments and weapons .
neither the weapons nor the instruments , contrary to the usual custom , bore the name of the maker ; they were , besides , in a perfect state , and did not appear to have been used .
the same peculiarity marked the tools and utensils ; all were new , which proved that the articles had not been taken by chance and thrown into the chest , but , on the contrary , that the choice of things had been well considered and arranged with care .
this was also indicated by the second case of metal which had preserved them from damp , and which could not have been soldered in a moment of haste .
as to the dictionaries of natural science and polynesian idioms , both were english ; but they neither bore the name of the publisher nor the date of publication .
the same with the bible printed in english , in quarto , remarkable from a typographic point of view , and which appeared to have been often used .
the atlas was a magnificent work , comprising maps of every country in the world , and several planispheres arranged upon mercator 's projection , and of which the nomenclature was in french -- but which also bore neither date nor name of publisher .
there was nothing , therefore , on these different articles by which they could be traced , and nothing consequently of a nature to show the nationality of the vessel which must have recently passed these shores .
but , wherever the chest might have come from , it was a treasure to the settlers on lincoln island .
till then , by making use of the productions of nature , they had created everything for themselves , and , thanks to their intelligence , they had managed without difficulty .
but did it not appear as if providence had wished to reward them by sending them these productions of human industry ?
their thanks rose unanimously to heaven .
however , one of them was not quite satisfied : it was pencroft .
it appeared that the chest did not contain something which he evidently held in great esteem , for in proportion as they approached the bottom of the box , his hurrahs diminished in heartiness , and , the inventory finished , he was heard to mutter these words:--"that 's all very fine , but you can see that there is nothing for me in that box ! "
this led neb to say,--
" why , friend pencroft , what more do you expect ? "
" half a pound of tobacco , " replied pencroft seriously , " and nothing would have been wanting to complete my happiness ! "
no one could help laughing at this speech of the sailor 's .
it was therefore agreed that the next morning at break of day , they should set out , by ascending the mercy so as to reach the western shore .
during the day the different articles were carried to granite house , where they were methodically arranged in the great hall .
this day -- the 29th of october -- happened to be a sunday , and , before going to bed , herbert asked the engineer if he would not read them something from the gospel .
" willingly , " replied cyrus harding .
he took the sacred volume , and was about to open it , when pencroft stopped him , saying,--"captain , i am superstitious .
open at random and read the first verse which , your eye falls upon .
we will see if it applies to our situation . "
cyrus harding smiled at the sailor 's idea , and , yielding to his wish , he opened exactly at a place where the leaves were separated by a marker .
immediately his eyes were attracted by a cross which , made with a pencil , was placed against the eighth verse of the seventh chapter of the gospel of st . matthew .
he read the verse , which was this:-- " for every one that asketh receiveth ; and he that seeketh findeth . "
chapter 3
the next day , the 30th of october , all was ready for the proposed exploring expedition , which recent events had rendered so necessary .
in fact , things had so come about that the settlers in lincoln island no longer needed help for themselves , but were even able to carry it to others .
it was therefore agreed that they should ascend the mercy as far as the river was navigable .
a great part of the distance would thus be traversed without fatigue , and the explorers could transport their provisions and arms to an advanced point in the west of the island .
it was necessary to think not only of the things which they should take with them , but also of those which they might have by chance to bring back to granite house .
if there had been a wreck on the coast , as was supposed , there would be many things cast up , which would be lawfully their prizes .
in the event of this , the cart would have been of more use than the light canoe , but it was heavy and clumsy to drag , and therefore more difficult to use ; this led pencroft to express his regret that the chest had not contained , besides " his halfpound of tobacco , " a pair of strong new jersey horses , which would have been very useful to the colony !
the provisions , which neb had already packed up , consisted of a store of meat and of several gallons of beer , that is to say enough to sustain them for three days , the time which harding assigned for the expedition .
they hoped besides to supply themselves on the road , and neb took care not to forget the portable stove .
the only tools the settlers took were the two woodmen 's axes , which they could use to cut a path through the thick forests , as also the instruments , the telescope and pocket - compass .
for weapons they selected the two flint - lock guns , which were likely to be more useful to them than the percussion fowling - pieces , the first only requiring flints which could be easily replaced , and the latter needing fulminating caps , a frequent use of which would soon exhaust their limited stock .
however , they took also one of the carbines and some cartridges .
it is useless to add that pencroft , herbert , and neb , thus armed , were at the summit of their happiness , although cyrus harding made them promise not to fire a shot unless it was necessary .
at six in the morning the canoe put off from the shore ; all had embarked , including top , and they proceeded to the mouth of the mercy .
in a few minutes the explorers arrived at the angle formed by the mercy and exactly at the place where , seven months before , pencroft had made his first raft of wood .
the aspect of the banks was magnificent .
cyrus harding and his companions could not but admire the lovely effects so easily produced by nature with water and trees .
as they advanced the forest element diminished .
on the right bank of the river grew magnificent specimens of the ulmaceae tribe , the precious elm , so valuable to builders , and which withstands well the action of water .
then there were numerous groups belonging to the same family , among others one in particular , the fruit of which produces a very useful oil .
further on , herbert remarked the lardizabala , a twining shrub which , when bruised in water , furnishes excellent cordage ; and two or three ebony trees of a beautiful black , crossed with capricious veins .
from time to time , in certain places where the landing was easy , the canoe was stopped , when gideon spilett , herbert , and pencroft , their guns in their hands , and preceded by top , jumped on shore .
" do you know what this plant is ? " asked herbert of the sailor .
" tobacco ! " cried pencroft , who evidently had never seen his favorite plant except in the bowl of his pipe .
" no , pencroft , " replied herbert ; " this is not tobacco , it is mustard . "
" mustard be hanged ! " returned the sailor ; " but if by chance you happen to come across a tobacco - plant , my boy , pray do n't scorn that ! "
" we shall find it some day ! " said gideon spilett .
" well ! " exclaimed pencroft , " when that day comes , i do not know what more will be wanting in our island ! "
these different plants , which had been carefully rooted up , were carried to the canoe , where cyrus harding had remained buried in thought .
the reporter , herbert , and pencroft in this manner frequently disembarked , sometimes on the right bank , sometimes on the left bank of the mercy .
the engineer ascertained by consulting his pocket - compass that the direction of the river from the first turn was obviously southwest and northeast , and nearly straight for a length of about three miles .
but it was to be supposed that this direction changed beyond that point , and that the mercy continued to the north - west , towards the spurs of mount franklin , among which the river rose .
during one of these excursions , gideon spilett managed to get hold of two couples of living gallinaceae .
they were birds with long , thin beaks , lengthened necks , short wings , and without any appearance of a tail .
herbert rightly gave them the name of tinamous , and it was resolved that they should be the first tenants of their future poultry - yard .
but till then the guns had not spoken , and the first report which awoke the echoes of the forest of the far west was provoked by the appearance of a beautiful bird , resembling the kingfisher .
" i recognize him ! " cried pencroft , and it seemed as if his gun went off by itself .
" the bird which escaped us on our first excursion , and from which we gave the name to that part of the forest . "
" a jacamar ! " cried herbert .
it was indeed a jacamar , of which the plumage shines with a metallic luster .
a shot brought it to the ground , and top carried it to the canoe . at the same time half a dozen lories were brought down . the lory is of the size of a pigeon , the plumage dashed with green , part of the wings crimson , and its crest bordered with white .
to the young boy belonged the honor of this shot , and he was proud enough of it .
lories are better food than the jacamar , the flesh of which is rather tough , but it was difficult to persuade pencroft that he had not killed the king of eatable birds .
it was ten o'clock in the morning when the canoe reached a second angle of the mercy , nearly five miles from its mouth .
the river still measured from sixty to seventy feet in breadth , and its bed from five to six feet in depth .
the engineer had observed that it was increased by numerous affluents , but they were unnavigable , being simply little streams .
as to the forest , including jacamar wood , as well as the forests of the far west , it extended as far as the eye could reach .
in no place , either in the depths of the forests or under the trees on the banks of the mercy , was the presence of man revealed .
the explorers could not discover one suspicious trace . it was evident that the woodman 's axe had never touched these trees , that the pioneer 's knife had never severed the creepers hanging from one trunk to another in the midst of tangled brushwood and long grass .
if castaways had landed on the island , they could not have yet quitted the shore , and it was not in the woods that the survivors of the supposed shipwreck should be sought .
the engineer therefore manifested some impatience to reach the western coast of lincoln island , which was at least five miles distant according to his estimation .
the voyage was continued , and as the mercy appeared to flow not towards the shore , but rather towards mount franklin , it was decided that they should use the boat as long as there was enough water under its keel to float it .
it was both fatigue spared and time gained , for they would have been obliged to cut a path through the thick wood with their axes .
but soon the flow completely failed them , either the tide was going down , and it was about the hour , or it could no longer be felt at this distance from the mouth of the mercy .
herbert and neb each took one , and pencroft took the scull .
what splendid specimens of the flora of this latitude !
certainly their presence would have been enough for a botanist to name without hesitation the parallel which traversed lincoln island .
" eucalypti ! " cried herbert .
they were , in fact , those splendid trees , the giants of the extratropical zone , the congeners of the australian and new zealand eucalyptus , both situated under the same latitude as lincoln island .
the ground at the foot of the eucalypti was carpeted with grass , and from the bushes escaped flights of little birds , which glittered in the sunlight like winged rubies .
" these are something like trees ! " cried neb ; " but are they good for anything ? "
" pooh ! " replied pencroft .
" of course there are vegetable giants as well as human giants , and they are no good , except to show themselves at fairs ! "
" i think that you are mistaken , pencroft , " replied gideon spilett , " and that the wood of the eucalyptus has begun to be very advantageously employed in cabinet - making . "
" and i may add , " said herbert , " that the eucalyptus belongs to a family which comprises many useful members ; the guava - tree , from whose fruit guava jelly is made ; the clove - tree , which produces the spice ; the pomegranate - tree , which bears pomegranates ; the eugeacia cauliflora , the fruit of which is used in making a tolerable wine ; the ugui myrtle , which contains an excellent alcoholic liquor ; the caryophyllus myrtle , of which the bark forms an esteemed cinnamon ; the eugenia pimenta , from whence comes jamaica pepper ; the common myrtle , from whose buds and berries spice is sometimes made ; the eucalyptus manifera , which yields a sweet sort of manna ; the guinea eucalyptus , the sap of which is transformed into beer by fermentation ; in short , all those trees known under the name of gum - trees or iron - bark trees in australia , belong to this family of the myrtaceae , which contains forty - six genera and thirteen hundred species ! "
the lad was allowed to run on , and he delivered his little botanical lecture with great animation .
cyrus harding listened smiling , and pencroft with an indescribable feeling of pride .
" very good , herbert , " replied pencroft , " but i could swear that all those useful specimens you have just told us about are none of them giants like these ! "
" that is true , pencroft . "
" there you are wrong , pencroft , " said the engineer ; " these gigantic eucalypti , which shelter us , are good for something . "
" and what is that ? "
" to render the countries which they inhabit healthy . do you know what they are called in australia and new zealand ? "
" no , captain . "
" they are called ' fever trees . ' "
" because they give fevers ? "
" no , because they prevent them ! "
" good .
" note it then , my dear spilett ; for it appears proved that the presence of the eucalyptus is enough to neutralize miasmas .
this natural antidote has been tried in certain countries in the middle of europe and the north of africa where the soil was absolutely unhealthy , and the sanitary condition of the inhabitants has been gradually ameliorated .
" ah ! what an island !
what a blessed island ! " cried pencroft .
" i tell you , it wants nothing -- unless it is-- "
the exploration was therefore continued for another two miles in the midst of country covered with eucalypti , which predominated in the woods of this portion of the island .
the sun was already sinking towards the horizon , and the trees threw long shadows on the ground .
cyrus harding , seeing that he could not hope to reach the western coast of the island in one journey , resolved to camp at the place where any further navigation was prevented by want of water .
the boat was pushed on through the forest , which gradually became thicker again , and appeared also to have more inhabitants ; for if the eyes of the sailor did not deceive him , he thought he saw bands of monkeys springing among the trees .
sometimes even two or three of these animals stopped at a little distance from the canoe and gazed at the settlers without manifesting any terror , as if , seeing men for the first time , they had not yet learned to fear them .
it would have been easy to bring down one of these quadramani with a gunshot , and pencroft was greatly tempted to fire , but harding opposed so useless a massacre .
it is true that the sailor considered the monkeys from a purely alimentary point of view , for those animals which are herbivorous make very excellent game ; but since they had an abundant supply of provisions , it was a pity to waste their ammunition .
towards four o'clock , the navigation of the mercy became exceedingly difficult , for its course was obstructed by aquatic plants and rocks .
the banks rose higher and higher , and already they were approaching the spurs of mount franklin .
the source could not be far off , since it was fed by the water from the southern slopes of the mountain .
" at what distance are we from granite house ? " asked herbert .
" about seven miles , " replied the engineer , " taking into calculation , however , the detours of the river , which has carried us to the northwest . "
" shall we go on ? " asked the reporter .
" yes , as long as we can , " replied cyrus harding .
" to - morrow , at break of day , we will leave the canoe , and in two hours i hope we shall cross the distance which separates us from the coast , and then we shall have the whole day in which to explore the shore . "
" go ahead ! " replied pencroft .
but soon the boat grated on the stony bottom of the river , which was now not more than twenty feet in breadth .
the trees met like a bower overhead , and caused a half - darkness .
they also heard the noise of a waterfall , which showed that a few hundred feet up the river there was a natural barrier .
presently , after a sudden turn of the river , a cascade appeared through the trees .
the canoe again touched the bottom , and in a few minutes it was moored to a trunk near the right bank .
it was nearly five o'clock .
the last rays of the sun gleamed through the thick foliage and glanced on the little waterfall , making the spray sparkle with all the colors of the rainbow .
beyond that , the mercy was lost in the bushwood , where it was fed from some hidden source .
the different streams which flowed into it increased it to a regular river further down , but here it was simply a shallow , limpid brook .
it was agreed to camp here , as the place was charming .
the colonists disembarked , and a fire was soon lighted under a clump of trees , among the branches of which cyrus harding and his companions could , if it was necessary , take refuge for the night .
supper was quickly devoured , for they were very hungry , and then there was only sleeping to think of .
but , as roarings of rather a suspicious nature had been heard during the evening , a good fire was made up for the night , so as to protect the sleepers with its crackling flames .
neb and pencroft also watched by turns , and did not spare fuel .
they thought they saw the dark forms of some wild animals prowling round the camp among the bushes , but the night passed without incident , and the next day , the 31st of october , at five o'clock in the morning , all were on foot , ready for a start .
chapter 4
it was six o ' clock in the morning when the settlers , after a hasty breakfast , set out to reach by the shortest way , the western coast of the island .
and how long would it take to do this ?
cyrus harding had said two hours , but of course that depended on the nature of the obstacles they might meet with .
as it was probable that they would have to cut a path through the grass , shrubs , and creepers , they marched axe in hand , and with guns also ready , wisely taking warning from the cries of the wild beasts heard in the night .
the exact position of the encampment could be determined by the bearing of mount franklin , and as the volcano arose in the north at a distance of less than three miles , they had only to go straight towards the southwest to reach the western coast .
they set out , having first carefully secured the canoe .
pencroft and neb carried sufficient provision for the little band for at least two days .
it would not thus be necessary to hunt . the engineer advised his companions to refrain from firing , that their presence might not be betrayed to any one near the shore .
the first hatchet blows were given among the brushwood in the midst of some mastic - trees , a little above the cascade ; and his compass in his hand , cyrus harding led the way .
the forest here was composed for the most part of trees which had already been met with near the lake and on prospect heights .
there were deodars , douglas firs , casuarinas , gum trees , eucalypti , hibiscus , cedars , and other trees , generally of a moderate size , for their number prevented their growth .
however , cyrus harding did not remember having seen , at the time of his excursion to the crater , any other watercourses but the red creek and the mercy .
during the first part of their excursion , they saw numerous troops of monkeys who exhibited great astonishment at the sight of men , whose appearance was so new to them .
gideon spilett jokingly asked whether these active and merry quadrupeds did not consider him and his companions as degenerate brothers .
and certainly , pedestrians , hindered at each step by bushes , caught by creepers , barred by trunks of trees , did not shine beside those supple animals , who , bounding from branch to branch , were hindered by nothing on their course .
the monkeys were numerous , but happily they did not manifest any hostile disposition .
several pigs , agoutis , kangaroos , and other rodents were seen , also two or three koalas , at which pencroft longed to have a shot .
this creek was deep and clear , but it was absolutely unnavigable .
" what would be the use of that ? " returned harding .
" this creek evidently runs to the sea .
forward ! "
" one minute , " said the reporter .
" the name of this creek , my friends ?
do not let us leave our geography incomplete . "
" all right ! " said pencroft .
" name it , my boy , " said the engineer , addressing the lad .
" will it not be better to wait until we have explored it to its mouth ? " answered herbert .
" very well , " replied cyrus harding .
" let us follow it as fast as we can without stopping . "
" still another minute ! " said pencroft .
" what 's the matter ? " asked the reporter .
" though hunting is forbidden , fishing is allowed , i suppose , " said the sailor .
" we have no time to lose , " replied the engineer .
" as i said , there is everything in this island , except tobacco ! " muttered pencroft with a sigh .
the fishing did not take five minutes , for the crayfish were swarming in the creek .
a bag was filled with the crustaceae , whose shells were of a cobalt blue . the settlers then pushed on .
they advanced more rapidly and easily along the bank of the river than in the forest .
from time to time they came upon the traces of animals of a large size who had come to quench their thirst at the stream , but none were actually seen , and it was evidently not in this part of the forest that the peccary had received the bullet which had cost pencroft a grinder .
in the meanwhile , considering the rapid current , harding was led to suppose that he and his companions were much farther from the western coast than they had at first supposed .
however , the creek gradually widened and its waters became less tumultuous .
the trees on the right bank were as close together as on the left bank , and it was impossible to distinguish anything beyond them ; but these masses of wood were evidently uninhabited , for top did not bark , and the intelligent animal would not have failed to signal the presence of any stranger in the neighborhood .
at half - past ten , to the great surprise of cyrus harding , herbert , who was a little in front , suddenly stopped and exclaimed,--
" the sea ! " in a few minutes more , the whole western shore of the island lay extended before the eyes of the settlers .
but what a contrast between this and the eastern coast , upon which chance had first thrown them .
no granite cliff , no rocks , not even a sandy beach .
the forest reached the shore , and the tall trees bending over the water were beaten by the waves .
it was not such a shore as is usually formed by nature , either by extending a vast carpet of sand , or by grouping masses of rock , but a beautiful border consisting of the most splendid trees .
the bank was raised a little above the level of the sea , and on this luxuriant soil , supported by a granite base , the fine forest trees seemed to be as firmly planted as in the interior of the island .
it was settled that the name of falls river should be given to this stream .
beyond , towards the north , the forest border was prolonged for a space of nearly two miles ; then the trees became scarcer , and beyond that again the picturesque heights described a nearly straight line , which ran north and south .
the weather was fine and clear , and from a height of a hillock on which neb and pencroft had arranged breakfast , a wide view was obtained .
but the engineer would take nothing for granted until he had explored the coast to the very extremity of the serpentine peninsula .
breakfast was soon despatched , and at half - past eleven the captain gave the signal for departure .
instead of proceeding over the summit of a cliff or along a sandy beach , the settlers were obliged to remain under cover of the trees so that they might continue on the shore .
it would have taken the settlers four hours to do this , on a clear ground and without hurrying themselves ; but as it was they needed double the time , for what with trees to go round , bushes to cut down , and creepers to chop away , they were impeded at every step , these obstacles greatly lengthening their journey .
there was , however , nothing to show that a shipwreck had taken place recently .
it is true that , as gideon spilett observed , any remains of it might have drifted out to sea , and they must not take it for granted that because they could find no traces of it , a ship had not been castaway on the coast .
it was already five o'clock , and there were still two miles between the settlers and the extremity of the serpentine peninsula .
there was not a tree without a nest , and not a nest which was not full of flapping wings .
it was possible that something might be found here , but darkness came on , and the further exploration had to be put off to the next day .
pencroft and herbert hastened on to find a suitable place for their camp .
among the last trees of the forest of the far west , the boy found several thick clumps of bamboos .
" good , " said he ; " this is a valuable discovery . "
" valuable ? " returned pencroft .
" certainly , " replied herbert .
no ! you do n't care for that .
" but what ? "
" but i can tell you , if you are ignorant of it , that in india these bamboos are eaten like asparagus . "
" asparagus thirty feet high ! " exclaimed the sailor .
" and are they good ? "
" perfect , my boy , perfect ! " replied pencroft .
" i will also add that the pith of the young stalks , preserved in vinegar , makes a good pickle . "
" better and better , herbert ! "
" and lastly , that the bamboos exude a sweet liquor which can be made into a very agreeable drink . "
" is that all ? " asked the sailor .
" that is all ! "
" and they do n't happen to do for smoking ? "
" no , my poor pencroft . "
herbert and the sailor had not to look long for a place in which to pass the night .
the rocks , which must have been violently beaten by the sea under the influence of the winds of the southwest , presented many cavities in which shelter could be found against the night air .
but just as they were about to enter one of these caves a loud roaring arrested them .
" back ! " cried pencroft .
" our guns are only loaded with small shot , and beasts which can roar as loud as that would care no more for it than for grains of salt ! "
and the sailor , seizing herbert by the arm , dragged him behind a rock , just as a magnificent animal showed itself at the entrance of the cavern .
it was a jaguar of a size at least equal to its asiatic congeners , that is to say , it measured five feet from the extremity of its head to the beginning of its tail .
the yellow color of its hair was relieved by streaks and regular oblong spots of black , which contrasted with the white of its chest .
herbert recognized it as the ferocious rival of the tiger , as formidable as the puma , which is the rival of the largest wolf !
the jaguar advanced and gazed around him with blazing eyes , his hair bristling as if this was not the first time he had scented men .
at this moment the reporter appeared round a rock , and herbert , thinking that he had not seen the jaguar , was about to rush towards him , when gideon spilett signed to him to remain where he was .
the jaguar collected itself for a spring , but at that moment a shot struck it in the eyes , and it fell dead .
herbert and pencroft rushed towards the jaguar .
neb and harding also ran up , and they remained for some instants contemplating the animal as it lay stretched on the ground , thinking that its magnificent skin would be a great ornament to the hall at granite house .
" oh , mr . spilett , how i admire and envy you ! " cried herbert , in a fit of very natural enthusiasm .
" well , my boy , " replied the reporter , " you could have done the same . "
" i ! with such coolness!-- "
" imagine to yourself , herbert , that the jaguar is only a hare , and you would fire as quietly as possible . "
" that is , " rejoined pencroft , " that it is not more dangerous than a hare ! "
" and now , " said gideon spilett , " since the jaguar has left its abode , i do not see , my friends , why we should not take possession of it for the night . "
" but others may come , " said pencroft .
" it will be enough to light a fire at the entrance of the cavern , " said the reporter , " and no wild beasts will dare to cross the threshold . "
" into the jaguar 's house , then ! " replied the sailor , dragging after him the body of the animal .
cyrus harding , seeing the clump of bamboos , cut a quantity , which he mingled with the other fuel .
this done , they entered the grotto , of which the floor was strewn with bones , the guns were carefully loaded , in case of a sudden attack , they had supper , and then just before they lay down to rest , the heap of wood piled at the entrance was set fire to .
immediately , a regular explosion , or rather a series of reports , broke the silence !
the noise was enough to terrify even the boldest of wild beasts .
cyrus harding and his companions slept like innocent marmots in the cave which the jaguar had so politely left at their disposal .
at sunrise all were on the shore at the extremity of the promontory , and their gaze was directed towards the horizon , of which two - thirds of the circumference were visible .
for the last time the engineer could ascertain that not a sail nor the wreck of a ship was on the sea , and even with the telescope nothing suspicious could be discovered .
the southern coast of the island still remained to be explored .
now should they undertake it immediately , and devote this day to it ?
this was not included in their first plan .
in fact , when the boat was abandoned at the sources of the mercy , it had been agreed that after having surveyed the west coast , they should go back to it , and return to granite house by the mercy .
harding then thought that the western coast would have offered refuge , either to a ship in distress , or to a vessel in her regular course ; but now , as he saw that this coast presented no good anchorage , he wished to seek on the south what they had not been able to find on the west .
gideon spilett proposed to continue the exploration , that the question of the supposed wreck might be completely settled , and he asked at what distance claw cape might be from the extremity of the peninsula .
" about thirty miles , " replied the engineer , " if we take into consideration the curvings of the coast . "
" thirty miles ! " returned spilett .
" that would be a long day 's march .
nevertheless , i think that we should return to granite house by the south coast . "
" but , " observed herbert , " from claw cape to granite house there must be at least another ten miles .
" make it forty miles in all , " replied the engineer , " and do not hesitate to do it .
at least we should survey the unknown shore , and then we shall not have to begin the exploration again . "
" very good , " said pencroft .
" the boat has remained by itself for one day at the sources of the mercy , " replied gideon spilett ; " it may just as well stay there two days !
as yet , we have had no reason to think that the island is infested by thieves ! "
" yet , " said the sailor , " when i remember the history of the turtle , i am far from confident of that . "
" the turtle ! the turtle ! " replied the reporter .
" do n't you know that the sea turned it over ? "
" who knows ? " murmured the engineer .
" but,-- " said neb .
neb had evidently something to say , for he opened his mouth to speak and yet said nothing .
" what do you want to say , neb ? " asked the engineer .
" if we return by the shore to claw cape , " replied neb , " after having doubled the cape , we shall be stopped-- "
" by the mercy ! of course , " replied herbert , " and we shall have neither bridge nor boat by which to cross . "
" a bridge ! " cried pencroft .
" well , is not the captain the best engineer in his profession ?
forward ! "
the reporter 's proposal , so strongly seconded by the sailor , received general approbation , for each wished to have their doubts set at rest , and by returning by claw cape the exploration would be ended .
but there was not an hour to lose , for forty miles was a long march , and they could not hope to reach granite house before night .
at six o'clock in the morning the little band set out .
from the extremity of the promontory which formed the tail of the peninsula the coast was rounded for a distance of five miles , which was rapidly passed over , without even the most minute investigations bringing to light the least trace of any old or recent landings ; no debris , no mark of an encampment , no cinders of a fire , nor even a footprint !
such was the development of this part of the island , which the settlers took in at a glance , while stopping for an instant .
" if a vessel ran in here , " said pencroft , " she would certainly be lost .
bad quarters ! "
" but at least something would be left of the ship , " observed the reporter .
" there might be pieces of wood on the rocks , but nothing on the sands , " replied the sailor .
" why ? "
" because the sands are still more dangerous than the rocks , for they swallow up everything that is thrown on them . in a few days the hull of a ship of several hundred tons would disappear entirely in there ! "
" so , pencroft , " asked the engineer , " if a ship has been wrecked on these banks , is it not astonishing that there is now no trace of her remaining ? "
" no , captain , with the aid of time and tempest .
however , it would be surprising , even in this case , that some of the masts or spars should not have been thrown on the beach , out of reach of the waves . "
" let us go on with our search , then , " returned cyrus harding .
at one o'clock the colonists arrived at the other side of washington bay , they having now gone a distance of twenty miles .
they then halted for breakfast .
the long sea - swell could be seen breaking over the rocks in the bay , forming a foamy fringe .
from this point to claw cape the beach was very narrow between the edge of the forest and the reefs .
walking was now more difficult , on account of the numerous rocks which encumbered the beach .
they ascertained , however , that eatable shellfish abounded there , but these could not be of any great advantage to them until some easy means of communication had been established between the two banks of the mercy , and until the means of transport had been perfected .
nothing therefore which threw any light on the supposed wreck could be found on this shore , yet an object of any importance , such as the hull of a ship , would have been seen directly , or any of her masts and spars would have been washed on shore , just as the chest had been , which was found twenty miles from here .
it formed quite a natural harbor , invisible from the sea , and was entered by a narrow channel .
at the back of this creek some violent convulsion had torn up the rocky border , and a cutting , by a gentle slope , gave access to an upper plateau , which might be situated at least ten miles from claw cape , and consequently four miles in a straight line from prospect heights .
gideon spilett proposed to his companions that they should make a halt here .
they agreed readily , for their walk had sharpened their appetites ; and although it was not their usual dinner - hour , no one refused to strengthen himself with a piece of venison .
this luncheon would sustain them until their supper , which they intended to take at granite house .
in a few minutes the settlers , seated under a clump of fine sea - pines , were devouring the provisions which neb produced from his bag .
" well , " said gideon spilett , " it seems we must make up our minds to console ourselves with thinking that no one will come to dispute with us the possession of lincoln island ! "
" but the bullet , " cried herbert .
" that was not imaginary , i suppose ! "
" hang it , no ! " exclaimed pencroft , thinking of his absent tooth .
" then what conclusion may be drawn ? " asked the reporter .
" this , " replied the engineer , " that three months or more ago , a vessel , either voluntarily or not , came here . "
" what ! then you admit , cyrus , that she was swallowed up without leaving any trace ? " cried the reporter .
" no , my dear spilett ; but you see that if it is certain that a human being set foot on the island , it appears no less certain that he has now left it . "
" then , if i understand you right , captain , " said herbert , " the vessel has left again ? "
" evidently . "
" and we have lost an opportunity to get back to our country ? " said neb .
but just as they were rising , top was heard loudly barking ; and the dog issued from the wood , holding in his mouth a rag soiled with mud .
neb seized it .
it was a piece of strong cloth !
top still barked , and by his going and coming , seemed to invite his master to follow him into the forest .
" now there 's something to explain the bullet ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" a castaway ! " replied herbert .
" wounded , perhaps ! " said neb .
" or dead ! " added the reporter .
all ran after the dog , among the tall pines on the border of the forest .
harding and his companions made ready their firearms , in case of an emergency .
they advanced some way into the wood , but to their great disappointment , they as yet saw no signs of any human being having passed that way .
shrubs and creepers were uninjured , and they had even to cut them away with the axe , as they had done in the deepest recesses of the forest .
it was difficult to fancy that any human creature had ever passed there , but yet top went backward and forward , not like a dog who searches at random , but like a dog being endowed with a mind , who is following up an idea .
in about seven or eight minutes top stopped in a glade surrounded with tall trees .
" what is the matter , top ? " said cyrus harding .
top barked louder , bounding about at the foot of a gigantic pine .
all at once pencroft shouted,--"ho , splendid ! capital ! "
" what is it ? " asked spilett .
" we have been looking for a wreck at sea or on land ! "
" well ? "
" well ; and here we 've found one in the air ! "
and the sailor pointed to a great white rag , caught in the top of the pine , a fallen scrap of which the dog had brought to them .
" but that is not a wreck ! " cried gideon spilett .
" i beg your pardon ! " returned pencroft .
" why ? is it-- ? "
" it is all that remains of our airy boat , of our balloon , which has been caught up aloft there , at the top of that tree ! "
pencroft was not mistaken , and he gave vent to his feelings in a tremendous hurrah , adding,--
there is what will furnish us with linen for years .
there is what will make us handkerchiefs and shirts !
pencroft 's joy was therefore shared by all .
but it was necessary to bring down the remains of the balloon from the tree , to place it in security , and this was no slight task .
neb , herbert , and the sailor , climbing to the summit of the tree , used all their skill to disengage the now reduced balloon .
the operation lasted two hours , and then not only the case , with its valve , its springs , its brasswork , lay on the ground , but the net , that is to say a considerable quantity of ropes and cordage , and the circle and the anchor .
the case , except for the fracture , was in good condition , only the lower portion being torn .
it was a fortune which had fallen from the sky .
" all the same , captain , " said the sailor , " if we ever decide to leave the island , it wo n't be in a balloon , will it ?
these airboats wo n't go where we want them to go , and we have had some experience in that way !
look here , we will build a craft of some twenty tons , and then we can make a main - sail , a foresail , and a jib out of that cloth .
as to the rest of it , that will help to dress us . "
" we shall see , pencroft , " replied cyrus harding ; " we shall see . "
" in the meantime , we must put it in a safe place , " said neb .
the settlers , uniting their efforts , managed to drag it as far as the shore , where they discovered a large rocky cavity , which owing to its position could not be visited either by the wind or rain .
" we needed a locker , and now we have one , " said pencroft ; " but as we can not lock it up , it will be prudent to hide the opening .
i do n't mean from two - legged thieves , but from those with four paws ! "
at six o'clock , all was stowed away , and after having given the creek the very suitable name of " port balloon , " the settlers pursued their way along claw cape .
pencroft and the engineer talked of the different projects which it was agreed to put into execution with the briefest possible delay .
in the meanwhile night came on , and it was already dark when the settlers reached flotsam point , where they had found the precious chest .
there the river was eighty feet in breadth , which was awkward to cross , but as pencroft had taken upon himself to conquer this difficulty , he was compelled to do it .
they were anxious to reach granite house to eat and sleep , and if the bridge had been constructed , in a quarter of an hour they would have been at home .
the night was very dark .
pencroft prepared to keep his promise by constructing a sort of raft , on which to make the passage of the mercy .
cyrus harding and spilett , seated on the bank , waited till their companions were ready for their help , while herbert roamed about , though without going to any distance .
all at once , the lad , who had strolled by the river , came running back , and , pointing up the mercy , exclaimed,--
" what is floating there ? "
pencroft stopped working , and seeing an indistinct object moving through the gloom,--
" a canoe ! " cried he .
all approached , and saw to their extreme surprise , a boat floating down the current .
no reply .
the boat still drifted onward , and it was not more than twelve feet off , when the sailor exclaimed,--
" but it is our own boat ! she has broken her moorings , and floated down the current .
i must say she has arrived very opportunely . "
" our boat ? " murmured the engineer .
pencroft was right .
it was indeed the canoe , of which the rope had undoubtedly broken , and which had come alone from the sources of the mercy .
" well , " said the reporter to him , in a low voice , " this is a strange thing . "
" strange indeed ! " returned cyrus harding .
strange or not , it was very fortunate .
herbert , the reporter , neb , and pencroft , embarked in turn .
if they had been living in the time of genii , this incident would have given them the right to think that the island was haunted by some supernatural being , who used his power in the service of the castaways !
a few strokes of the oar brought the settlers to the mouth of the mercy .
the canoe was hauled up on the beach near the chimneys , and all proceeded towards the ladder of granite house .
but at that moment , top barked angrily , and neb , who was looking for the first steps , uttered a cry . there was no longer a ladder !
chapter 6
cyrus harding stood still , without saying a word .
his companions searched in the darkness on the wall , in case the wind should have moved the ladder , and on the ground , thinking that it might have fallen down .... but the ladder had quite disappeared .
as to ascertaining if a squall had blown it on the landing - place , half way up , that was impossible in the dark .
" if it is a joke , " cried pencroft , " it is a very stupid one !
to come home and find no staircase to go up to your room by -- that 's nothing for weary men to laugh at . "
neb could do nothing but cry out " oh ! oh ! oh ! "
" i begin to think that very curious things happen in lincoln island ! " said pencroft .
some one has come during our absence , taken possession of our dwelling and drawn up the ladder . "
" some one , " cried the sailor .
" but who ? "
" who but the hunter who fired the bullet ? " replied the reporter .
" well , if there is any one up there , " replied pencroft , who began to lose patience , " i will give them a hail , and they must answer . "
and in a stentorian voice the sailor gave a prolonged " halloo ! " which was echoed again and again from the cliff and rocks .
the settlers listened and they thought they heard a sort of chuckling laugh , of which they could not guess the origin .
but no voice replied to pencroft , who in vain repeated his vigorous shouts .
there was something indeed in this to astonish the most apathetic of men , and the settlers were not men of that description .
in their situation every incident had its importance , and , certainly , during the seven months which they had spent on the island , they had not before met with anything of so surprising a character .
neb bewailed himself , much disappointed at not being able to get into his kitchen , for the provisions which they had had on their expedition were exhausted , and they had no means of renewing them .
" my friends , " at last said cyrus harding , " there is only one thing to be done at present ; wait for day , and then act according to circumstances .
" but who is it that has played us this cool trick ? " again asked pencroft , unable to make up his mind to retire from the spot .
whoever it was , the only thing practicable was to do as the engineer proposed , to go to the chimneys and there wait for day .
in the meanwhile top was ordered to mount guard below the windows of granite house , and when top received an order he obeyed it without any questioning .
the brave dog therefore remained at the foot of the cliff while his master with his companions sought a refuge among the rocks .
to say that the settlers , notwithstanding their fatigue , slept well on the sandy floor of the chimneys would not be true .
that could not be helped , however , for in some way or other at that moment their dwelling was occupied , and they could not possibly enter it .
now granite house was more than their dwelling , it was their warehouse .
their uneasiness led one or other of them also to go out every few minutes to see if top was keeping good watch .
cyrus harding alone waited with his habitual patience , although his strong mind was exasperated at being confronted with such an inexplicable fact , and he was provoked at himself for allowing a feeling to which he could not give a name , to gain an influence over him .
" it is a joke , " said pencroft ; " it is a trick some one has played us .
as soon as the first gleam of light appeared in the east , the colonists , suitably armed , repaired to the beach under granite house .
all here was in order ; but a cry escaped the colonists when they saw that the door , which they had closed on their departure , was now wide open .
some one had entered granite house -- there could be no more doubt about that .
the upper ladder , which generally hung from the door to the landing , was in its place , but the lower ladder was drawn up and raised to the threshold .
it was evident that the intruders had wished to guard themselves against a surprise .
pencroft hailed again .
no reply .
" the beggars , " exclaimed the sailor .
" there they are sleeping quietly as if they were in their own house .
hallo there , you pirates , brigands , robbers , sons of john bull ! "
the sun had now completely risen , and the whole facade of granite house became illuminated by its rays ; but in the interior as well as on the exterior all was quiet and calm .
the settlers asked if granite house was inhabited or not , and yet the position of the ladder was sufficient to show that it was ; it was also certain that the inhabitants , whoever they might be , had not been able to escape .
but how were they to be got at ?
herbert then thought of fastening a cord to an arrow , and shooting the arrow so that it should pass between the first rounds of the ladder which hung from the threshold .
there was evidently nothing else to be done , and , with a little skill , this method might succeed .
very fortunately bows and arrows had been left at the chimneys , where they also found a quantity of light hibiscus cord .
pencroft fastened this to a well - feathered arrow .
then herbert fixing it to his bow , took a careful aim for the lower part of the ladder .
the bow was bent , the arrow flew , taking the cord with it , and passed between the two last rounds .
the operation had succeeded .
herbert immediately seized the end of the cord , but , at that moment when he gave it a pull to bring down the ladder , an arm , thrust suddenly out between the wall and the door , grasped it and dragged it inside granite house .
" but who was it ? " asked neb .
" who was it ?
did n't you see ? "
" no . "
" it was a monkey , a sapajou , an orangoutang , a baboon , a gorilla , a sagoin .
our dwelling has been invaded by monkeys , who climbed up the ladder during our absence . "
" i knew that it was only a joke , " cried pencroft ; " but one of the jokers shall pay the penalty for the rest . "
so saying , the sailor , raising his piece , took a rapid aim at one of the monkeys and fired .
all disappeared , except one who fell mortally wounded on the beach .
this monkey , which was of a large size , evidently belonged to the first order of the quadrumana .
whether this was a chimpanzee , an orangoutang , or a gorilla , he took rank among the anthropoid apes , who are so called from their resemblance to the human race .
" what a magnificent beast ! " cried neb .
" magnificent , if you like , " replied pencroft ; " but still i do not see how we are to get into our house . "
" herbert is a good marksman , " said the reporter , " and his bow is here .
he can try again . "
" why , these apes are so cunning , " returned pencroft ; " they wo n't show themselves again at the windows and so we ca n't kill them ; and when i think of the mischief they may do in the rooms and storehouse-- "
" have patience , " replied harding ; " these creatures can not keep us long at bay . "
" i shall not be sure of that till i see them down here , " replied the sailor .
" and now , captain , do you know how many dozens of these fellows are up there ? "
it was difficult to reply to pencroft , and as for the young boy making another attempt , that was not easy ; for the lower part of the ladder had been drawn again into the door , and when another pull was given , the line broke and the ladder remained firm .
the case was really perplexing .
it was certain that the settlers would end by reinstating themselves in their domicile and driving out the intruders , but when and how ? this is what they were not able to say .
two hours passed , during which the apes took care not to show themselves , but they were still there , and three or four times a nose or a paw was poked out at the door or windows , and was immediately saluted by a gun - shot .
" let us hide ourselves , " at last said the engineer .
" perhaps the apes will think we have gone quite away and will show themselves again .
let spilett and herbert conceal themselves behind those rocks and fire on all that may appear . "
the engineer 's orders were obeyed , and while the reporter and the lad , the best marksmen in the colony , posted themselves in a good position , but out of the monkeys ' sight , neb , pencroft , and cyrus climbed the plateau and entered the forest in order to kill some game , for it was now time for breakfast and they had no provisions remaining .
in half an hour the hunters returned with a few rock pigeons , which they roasted as well as they could .
not an ape had appeared .
gideon spilett and herbert went to take their share of the breakfast , leaving top to watch under the windows .
two hours later , their situation was in no degree improved .
" but we must drive these vagabonds out somehow , " cried the sailor .
come now , is there no way of getting at them ? "
" let us try to enter granite house by the old opening at the lake , " replied the engineer .
" oh ! " shouted the sailor , " and i never thought of that . "
this was in reality the only way by which to penetrate into granite house so as to fight with and drive out the intruders .
the opening was , it is true , closed up with a wall of cemented stones , which it would be necessary to sacrifice , but that could easily be rebuilt .
fortunately , cyrus harding had not as yet effected his project of hiding this opening by raising the waters of the lake , for the operation would then have taken some time .
but they had not made fifty steps in this direction , when they heard the dog barking furiously .
and all rushed down the bank again .
arrived at the turning , they saw that the situation had changed .
in fact , the apes , seized with a sudden panic , from some unknown cause , were trying to escape .
two or three ran and clambered from one window to another with the agility of acrobats .
they were not even trying to replace the ladder , by which it would have been easy to descend ; perhaps in their terror they had forgotten this way of escape .
at this moment the ladder was seen to slip over the threshold , then unroll and fall to the ground .
" hullo ! " cried the sailor , " this is queer ! "
" very strange ! " murmured the engineer , leaping first up the ladder .
" we shall soon see , " replied the engineer , without stopping however .
all his companions followed him , and in a minute they had arrived at the threshold .
" well now , and the ladder , " cried the sailor ; " who can the gentleman have been who sent us that down ? "
but at that moment a cry was heard , and a great orang , who had hidden himself in the passage , rushed into the room , pursued by neb .
" ah , the robber ! " cried pencroft .
and hatchet in hand , he was about to cleave the head of the animal , when cyrus harding seized his arm , saying,--
" spare him , pencroft . "
" pardon this rascal ? "
" yes ! it was he who threw us the ladder ! "
and the engineer said this in such a peculiar voice that it was difficult to know whether he spoke seriously or not .
nevertheless , they threw themselves on the orang , who defended himself gallantly , but was soon overpowered and bound .
" there ! " said pencroft .
" and what shall we make of him , now we 've got him ? "
" a servant ! " replied herbert .
the settlers then approached the ape and gazed at it attentively .
he belonged to the family of anthropoid apes , of which the facial angle is not much inferior to that of the australians and hottentots .
it is to this family of the anthropoid apes that so many characteristics belong which prove them to be possessed of an almost human intelligence .
employed in houses , they can wait at table , sweep rooms , brush clothes , clean boots , handle a knife , fork , and spoon properly , and even drink wine ... doing everything as well as the best servant that ever walked upon two legs .
buffon possessed one of these apes , who served him for a long time as a faithful and zealous servant .
the one which had been seized in the hall of granite house was a great fellow , six feet high , with an admirably poportioned frame , a broad chest , head of a moderate size , the facial angle reaching sixty - five degrees , round skull , projecting nose , skin covered with soft glossy hair , in short , a fine specimen of the anthropoids .
" a handsome fellow ! " said pencroft ; " if we only knew his language , we could talk to him . "
" but , master , " said neb , " are you serious ?
are we going to take him as a servant ? "
" yes , neb , " replied the engineer , smiling .
" and i hope he will make an excellent servant , " added herbert .
" he appears young , and will be easy to educate , and we shall not be obliged to use force to subdue him , nor draw his teeth , as is sometimes done .
he will soon grow fond of his masters if they are kind to him . "
" and they will be , " replied pencroft , who had forgotten all his rancor against " the jokers . "
then , approaching the orang,--
the orang replied by a little grunt which did not show any anger .
" you wish to join the colony ? " again asked the sailor .
" you are going to enter the service of captain cyrus harding ? "
another respondent grunt was uttered by the ape .
" and you will be satisfied with no other wages than your food ? "
third affirmative grunt .
" this conversation is slightly monotonous , " observed gideon spilett .
" so much the better , " replied pencroft ; " the best servants are those who talk the least .
and then , no wages , do you hear , my boy ?
we will give you no wages at first , but we will double them afterwards if we are pleased with you . "
thus the colony was increased by a new member .
as to his name the sailor begged that in memory of another ape which he had known , he might be called jupiter , and jup for short .
and so , without more ceremony , master jup was installed in granite house .
chapter 7
the settlers in lincoln island had now regained their dwelling , without having been obliged to reach it by the old opening , and were therefore spared the trouble of mason 's work .
it was certainly lucky , that at the moment they were about to set out to do so , the apes had been seized with that terror , no less sudden than inexplicable , which had driven them out of granite house .
had the animals discovered that they were about to be attacked from another direction ?
this was the only explanation of their sudden retreat .
during the day the bodies of the apes were carried into the wood , where they were buried ; then the settlers busied themselves in repairing the disorder caused by the intruders , disorder but not damage , for although they had turned everything in the rooms topsy - turvy , yet they had broken nothing .
neb relighted his stove , and the stores in the larder furnished a substantial repast , to which all did ample justice .
jup was not forgotten , and he ate with relish some stonepine almonds and rhizome roots , with which he was abundantly supplied .
pencroft had unfastened his arms , but judged it best to have his legs tied until they were more sure of his submission .
then , before retiring to rest , harding and his companions seated round their table , discussed those plans , the execution of which was most pressing .
the most important and most urgent was the establishment of a bridge over the mercy , so as to form a communication with the southern part of the island and granite house ; then the making of an enclosure for the musmons or other woolly animals which they wished to capture .
these two projects would help to solve the difficulty as to their clothing , which was now serious .
as to the enclosure , it was cyrus harding 's intention to establish it at the sources of the red creek , where the ruminants would find fresh and abundant pasture .
the road between prospect heights and the sources of the stream was already partly beaten , and with a better cart than the first , the material could be easily conveyed to the spot , especially if they could manage to capture some animals to draw it .
but though there might be no inconvenience in the enclosure being so far from granite house , it would not be the same with the poultry - yard , to which neb called the attention of the colonists .
it was indeed necessary that the birds should be close within reach of the cook , and no place appeared more favorable for the establishment of the said poultry - yard than that portion of the banks of the lake which was close to the old opening .
water - birds would prosper there as well as others , and the couple of tinamous taken in their last excursion would be the first to be domesticated .
the next day , the 3rd of november , the new works were begun by the construction of the bridge , and all hands were required for this important task .
saws , hatchets , and hammers were shouldered by the settlers , who , now transformed into carpenters , descended to the shore .
there pencroft observed,--
" suppose , that during our absence , master jup takes it into his head to draw up the ladder which he so politely returned to us yesterday ? "
" let us tie its lower end down firmly , " replied cyrus harding .
there they halted , in order to ascertain if the bridge could be thrown across .
cyrus harding now imparted to his companions a scheme for completely isolating prospect heights so as to shelter it from the attacks both of quadrupeds and quadrumana .
the western border of the plateau now remained between the turn of the river and the southern angle of the lake , a distance of about a mile , which was open to all comers .
but nothing could be easier than to dig a broad deep ditch , which could be filled from the lake , and the overflow of which would throw itself by a rapid fall into the bed of the mercy .
now , if these bridges can be raised at will , prospect heights will be guarded from any surprise . "
the bridge was the most urgent work .
trees were selected , cut down , stripped of their branches , and cut into beams , joists , and planks .
the end of the bridge which rested on the right bank of the mercy was to be firm , but the other end on the left bank was to be movable , so that it might be raised by means of a counterpoise , as some canal bridges are managed .
this was certainly a considerable work , and though it was skillfully conducted , it took some time , for the mercy at this place was eighty feet wide .
the construction of the mercy bridge lasted three weeks of regular hard work .
they even breakfasted on the scene of their labors , and the weather being magnificent , they only returned to granite house to sleep .
during this period it may be stated that master jup grew more accustomed to his new masters , whose movements he always watched with very inquisitive eyes .
however , as a precautionary measure , pencroft did not as yet allow him complete liberty , rightly wishing to wait until the limits of the plateau should be settled by the projected works .
top and jup were good friends and played willingly together , but jup did everything solemnly .
on the 20th of november the bridge was finished .
the movable part , balanced by the counterpoise , swung easily , and only a slight effort was needed to rise it ; between its hinge and the last cross - bar on which it rested when closed , there existed a space of twenty feet , which was sufficiently wide to prevent any animals from crossing .
the settlers now began to talk of fetching the balloon - case , which they were anxious to place in perfect security ; but to bring it , it would be necessary to take a cart to port balloon , and consequently , necessary to beat a road through the dense forests of the far west .
also , neb and pencroft having gone to examine into the state of things at port balloon , and reported that the stock of cloth would suffer no damage in the grotto where it was stored , it was decided that the work at prospect heights should not be discontinued .
" that , " observed pencroft , " will enable us to establish our poultry - yard under better conditions , since we need have no fear of visits from foxes nor the attacks of other beasts . "
" then , " added neb , " we can clear the plateau , and transplant wild plants to it . "
" and prepare our second corn - field ! " cried the sailor with a triumphant air .
these eight hundred grains , except fifty , which were prudently reserved , were to be sown in a new field , but with no less care than was bestowed on the single grain .
the field was prepared , then surrounded with a strong palisade , high and pointed , which quadrupeds would have found difficulty in leaping .
the seven hundred and fifty grains deposited in very regular furrows were then left for nature to do the rest .
on the 21st of november , cyrus harding began to plan the canal which was to close the plateau on the west , from the south angle of lake grant to the angle of the mercy .
in less than a fortnight a ditch , twelve feet wide and six deep , was dug out in the hard ground of the plateau .
by the end of the first fortnight of december these works were finished , and prospect heights -- that is to say , a sort of irregular pentagon , having a perimeter of nearly four miles , surrounded by a liquid belt -- was completely protected from depredators of every description .
it is useless to say that since the enclosing of the plateau had been completed , master jup had been set at liberty .
he was already taught to make himself useful by drawing loads of wood and carting away the stones which were extracted from the bed of creek glycerine .
the poultry - yard occupied an area of two hundred square yards , on the southeastern bank of the lake .
these were simply built of branches and divided into compartments , made ready for the expected guests .
some belonged to the chinese species , of which the wings open like a fan , and which by the brilliancy of their plumage rival the golden pheasants .
a few days afterwards , herbert snared a couple of gallinaceae , with spreading tails composed of long feathers , magnificent alectors , which soon became tame .
it was necessary to bring the case to granite house , and the colonists employed themselves in rendering their heavy cart lighter and more manageable .
but though they had a vehicle , the moving power was yet to be found .
but did there not exist in the island some animal which might supply the place of the horse , ass , or ox ?
one day , the 23rd of december , neb and top were heard shouting and barking , each apparently trying to see who could make the most noise .
the settlers , who were busy at the chimneys , ran , fearing some vexatious incident .
what did they see ?
two fine animals of a large size that had imprudently ventured on the plateau , when the bridges were open .
one would have said they were horses , or at least donkeys , male and female , of a fine shape , dove - colored , the legs and tail white , striped with black on the head and neck .
they advanced quietly without showing any uneasiness , and gazed at the men , in whom they could not as yet recognize their future masters .
" these are onagers ! " cried herbert , " animals something between the zebra and the quagga ! "
" why not donkeys ? " asked neb .
" because they have not long ears , and their shape is more graceful ! "
" donkeys or horses , " interrupted pencroft , " they are ' moving powers , ' as the captain would say , and as such must be captured ! "
now , should they seize them with violence and master them by force ?
no .
it was decided that for a few days they should be allowed to roam freely about the plateau , where there was an abundance of grass , and the engineer immediately began to prepare a stable near the poultry - yard , in which the onagers might find food , with a good litter , and shelter during the night .
this done , the movements of the two magnificent creatures were left entirely free , and the settlers avoided even approaching them so as to terrify them .
several times , however , the onagers appeared to wish to leave the plateau , too confined for animals accustomed to the plains and forests .
they were then seen following the water - barrier which everywhere presented itself before them , uttering short neighs , then galloping through the grass , and becoming calmer , they would remain entire hours gazing at the woods , from which they were cut off for ever !
in the meantime harness of vegetable fiber had been manufactured , and some days after the capture of the onagers , not only the cart was ready , but a straight road , or rather a cutting , had been made through the forests of the far west , from the angle of the mercy to port balloon .
the cart might then be driven there , and towards the end of december they tried the onagers for the first time .
pencroft had already coaxed the animals to come and eat out of his hand , and they allowed him to approach without making any difficulty , but once harnessed they reared and could with difficulty be held in .
however , it was not long before they submitted to this new service , for the onager , being less refractory than the zebra , is frequently put in harness in the mountainous regions of southern africa , and it has even been acclimatized in europe , under zones of a relative coolness .
on this day all the colony , except pencroft who walked at the animals ' heads , mounted the cart , and set out on the road to port balloon .
at eight o'clock that evening the cart , after passing over the mercy bridge , descended the left bank of the river , and stopped on the beach .
the onagers being unharnessed , were thence led to their stable , and pencroft before going to sleep gave vent to his feelings in a deep sigh of satisfaction that awoke all the echoes of granite house .
chapter 8
the first week of january was devoted to the manufacture of the linen garments required by the colony .
the needles found in the box were used by sturdy if not delicate fingers , and we may be sure that what was sewn was sewn firmly .
the cloth of which the balloon - case was made was then cleaned by means of soda and potash , obtained by the incineration of plants , in such a way that the cotton , having got rid of the varnish , resumed its natural softness and elasticity ; then , exposed to the action of the atmosphere , it soon became perfectly white .
some dozen shirts and sock -- the latter not knitted , of course , but made of cotton -- were thus manufactured .
with the beginning of the year 1866 the heat was very great , but the hunting in the forests did not stand still .
agouties , peccaries , capybaras , kangaroos , game of all sorts , actually swarmed there , and spilett and herbert were too good marksmen ever to throw away their shot uselessly .
they should , then , prepare for the unknown future by husbanding their ammunition and by substituting for it some easily renewable substance .
to replace lead , of which harding had found no traces in the island , he employed granulated iron , which was easy to manufacture .
these bullets , not having the weight of leaden bullets , were made larger , and each charge contained less , but the skill of the sportsmen made up this deficiency .
he accordingly resolved to manufacture and employ pyroxyle , although it has some inconveniences , that is to say , a great inequality of effect , an excessive inflammability , since it takes fire at one hundred and seventy degrees instead of two hundred and forty , and lastly , an instantaneous deflagration which might damage the firearms .
on the other hand , the advantages of pyroxyle consist in this , that it is not injured by damp , that it does not make the gun - barrels dirty , and that its force is four times that of ordinary powder .
to make pyroxyle , the cotton must be immersed in the fuming azotic acid for a quarter of an hour , then washed in cold water and dried .
the sportsmen of the island therefore soon had a perfectly prepared substance , which , employed discreetly , produced admirable results .
about this time the settlers cleared three acres of the plateau , and the rest was preserved in a wild state , for the benefit of the onagers .
the rabbit - warren still continued to supply the larder of granite house .
master neb , who was skilled in the culinary art , knew how to vary agreeably the bill of fare .
bread alone was wanting at the table of the settlers , and as has been said , they felt this privation greatly .
the settlers hunted too the turtles which frequented the shores of cape mandible .
at this place the beach was covered with little mounds , concealing perfectly spherical turtles ' eggs , with white hard shells , the albumen of which does not coagulate as that of birds ' eggs .
they were hatched by the sun , and their number was naturally considerable , as each turtle can lay annually two hundred and fifty .
" a regular egg - field , " observed gideon spilett , " and we have nothing to do but to pick them up . "
the turtle soup , flavored with aromatic herbs , often gained well - merited praises for its preparer , neb .
we must here mention another fortunate circumstance by which new stores for the winter were laid in .
shoals of salmon entered the mercy , and ascended the country for several miles .
it was the time at which the females , going to find suitable places in which to spawn , precede the males and make a great noise through the fresh water .
by this time the intelligent jup was raised to the duty of valet .
the clever orang had been marvelously trained by neb , and any one would have said that the negro and the ape understood each other when they talked together .
jup had besides a real affection for neb , and neb returned it .
when his services were not required , either for carrying wood or for climbing to the top of some tree , jup passed the greatest part of his time in the kitchen , where he endeavored to imitate neb in all that he saw him do .
the black showed the greatest patience and even extreme zeal in instructing his pupil , and the pupil exhibited remarkable intelligence in profiting by the lessons he received from his master .
judge then of the pleasure master jup gave to the inhabitants of granite house when , without their having had any idea of it , he appeared one day , napkin on his arm , ready to wait at table .
quick , attentive , he acquitted himself perfectly , changing the plates , bringing dishes , pouring out water , all with a gravity which gave intense amusement to the settlers , and which enraptured pencroft .
" jup , some soup ! "
" jup , a little agouti ! "
" jup , a plate ! "
" jup !
" decidedly , jup , your wages must be doubled . "
it is useless to say that the orang was now thoroughly domesticated at granite house , and that he often accompanied his masters to the forest without showing any wish to leave them .
it was most amusing to see him walking with a stick which pencroft had given him , and which he carried on his shoulder like a gun .
" if he was as mischievous as he is good , there would be no doing anything with him ! "
it was towards the end of january the colonists began their labors in the center of the island .
it had been decided that a corral should be established near the sources of the red creek , at the foot of mount franklin , destined to contain the ruminants , whose presence would have been troublesome at granite house , and especially for the musmons , who were to supply the wool for the settlers ' winter garments .
there a site was chosen , at the back of the southern ridge of the mountain .
the grass was fresh , and it was not too much shaded by the trees which grew about it .
this meadow was to be surrounded by a palisade , high enough to prevent even the most agile animals from leaping over .
this enclosure would be large enough to contain a hundred musmons and wild goats , with all the young ones they might produce .
the construction of this corral did not take less than three weeks , for besides the palisade , cyrus harding built large sheds , in which the animals could take shelter .
these buildings had also to be made very strong , for musmons are powerful animals , and their first fury was to be feared .
the stakes , sharpened at their upper end and hardened by fire , had been fixed by means of cross - bars , and at regular distances props assured the solidity of the whole .
this was done on the 7th of february , on a beautiful summer 's day , and every one took part in it .
the onagers , already well trained , were ridden by spilett and herbert , and were of great use .
the maneuver consisted simply in surrounding the musmons and goats , and gradually narrowing the circle around them .
cyrus harding , pencroft , neb , and jup , posted themselves in different parts of the wood , while the two cavaliers and top galloped in a radius of half a mile round the corral .
the musmons were very numerous in this part of the island .
these fine animals were as large as deer ; their horns were stronger than those of the ram , and their gray - colored fleece was mixed with long hair .
this hunting day was very fatiguing . such going and coming , and running and riding and shouting !
of a hundred musmons which had been surrounded , more than two - thirds escaped , but at last , thirty of these animals and ten wild goats were gradually driven back towards the corral , the open door of which appearing to offer a means of escape , they rushed in and were prisoners .
in short , the result was satisfactory , and the settlers had no reason to complain .
that evening the hunters returned to granite house quite exhausted .
however , notwithstanding their fatigue , they returned the next day to visit the corral .
the prisoners had been trying to overthrow the palisade , but of course had not succeeded , and were not long in becoming more tranquil .
during the month of february , no event of any importance occurred .
the daily labors were pursued methodically , and , as well as improving the roads to the corral and to port balloon , a third was commenced , which , starting from the enclosure , proceeded towards the western coast .
the yet unknown portion of lincoln island was that of the wood - covered serpentine peninsula , which sheltered the wild beasts , from which gideon spilett was so anxious to clear their domain .
before the cold season should appear the most assiduous care was given to the cultivation of the wild plants which had been transplanted from the forest to prospect heights .
the kitchen garden , now well stocked and carefully defended from the birds , was divided into small beds , where grew lettuces , kidney potatoes , sorrel , turnips , radishes , and other coneiferae .
the soil on the plateau was particularly fertile , and it was hoped that the harvests would be abundant .
towards the end of the summer , the poultry - yard was possessed of a couple of fine bustards , which belonged to the houbara species , characterized by a sort of feathery mantle ; a dozen shovelers , whose upper mandible was prolonged on each side by a membraneous appendage ; and also some magnificent cocks , similar to the mozambique cocks , the comb , caruncle , and epidermis being black .
so far , everything had succeeded , thanks to the activity of these courageous and intelligent men .
nature did much for them , doubtless ; but faithful to the great precept , they made a right use of what a bountiful providence gave them .
after the heat of these warm summer days , in the evening when their work was finished and the sea - breeze began to blow , they liked to sit on the edge of prospect heights , in a sort of veranda , covered with creepers , which neb had made with his own hands .
there they talked , they instructed each other , they made plans , and the rough good - humor of the sailor always amused this little world , in which the most perfect harmony had never ceased to reign .
they often spoke of their country , of their dear and great america .
what was the result of the war of secession ?
it could not have been greatly prolonged .
for eleven months all communication between them and the rest of their fellow - creatures had been interrupted , and in a short time the 24th of march would arrive , the anniversary of the day on which the balloon had thrown them on this unknown coast .
they were then mere castaways , not even knowing how they should preserve their miserable lives from the fury of the elements !
and now , thanks to the knowledge of their captain , and their own intelligence , they were regular colonists , furnished with arms , tools , and instruments ; they had been able to turn to their profit the animals , plants , and minerals of the island , that is to say , the three kingdoms of nature .
yes ; they often talked of all these things and formed still more plans .
as to cyrus harding he was for the most part silent , and listened to his companions more often than he spoke to them .
chapter 9
the weather changed during the first week of march .
the atmosphere was felt to be full of electricity , and a period of some length of tempestuous weather was to be feared .
indeed , on the 2nd , peals of thunder were heard , the wind blew from the east , and hail rattled against the facade of granite house like volleys of grape - shot .
the door and windows were immediately closed , or everything in the rooms would have been drenched .
on seeing these hailstones , some of which were the size of a pigeon 's egg , pencroft 's first thought was that his cornfield was in serious danger .
he directly rushed to his field , where little green heads were already appearing , and by means of a great cloth , he managed to protect his crop .
this bad weather lasted a week , during which time the thunder rolled without cessation in the depths of the sky .
the colonists , not having any pressing work out of doors , profited by the bad weather to work at the interior of granite house , the arrangement of which was becoming more complete from day to day .
the engineer made a turning - lathe , with which he turned several articles both for the toilet and the kitchen , particularly buttons , the want of which was greatly felt .
a gunrack had been made for the firearms , which were kept with extreme care , and neither tables nor cupboards were left incomplete .
they sawed , they planed , they filed , they turned ; and during the whole of this bad season , nothing was heard but the grinding of tools or the humming of the turning - lathe which responded to the growling of the thunder .
master jup had not been forgotten , and he occupied a room at the back , near the storeroom , a sort of cabin with a cot always full of good litter , which perfectly suited his taste .
" with good old jup there is never any quarreling , " often repeated pencroft , " never any improper reply .
what a servant , neb , what a servant ! "
of course jup was now well used to service .
he brushed their clothes , he turned the spit , he waited at table , he swept the rooms , he gathered wood , and he performed another admirable piece of service which delighted pencroft -- he never went to sleep without first coming to tuck up the worthy sailor in his bed .
as to the health of the members of the colony , bipeds or bimana , quadrumana or quadrupeds , it left nothing to be desired .
with their life in the open air , on this salubrious soil , under that temperate zone , working both with head and hands , they could not suppose that illness would ever attack them .
his figure was forming and becoming more manly , and he promised to be an accomplished man , physically as well as morally .
besides he improved himself during the leisure hours which manual occupations left to him ; he read the books found in the case ; and after the practical lessons which were taught by the very necessity of their position , he found in the engineer for science , and the reporter for languages , masters who were delighted to complete his education .
the tempest ended about the 9th of march , but the sky remained covered with clouds during the whole of this last summer month .
the atmosphere , violently agitated by the electric commotions , could not recover its former purity , and there was almost invariably rain and fog , except for three or four fine days on which several excursions were made .
in the corral , the flock of musmons had also increased , and several lambs already bleated in the sheds , to the great delight of neb and herbert , who had each their favorite among these newcomers .
an attempt was also made for the domestication of the peccaries , which succeeded well .
a sty was constructed under the poultry - yard , and soon contained several young ones in the way to become civilized , that is to say , to become fat under neb 's care .
master jup , entrusted with carrying them their daily nourishment , leavings from the kitchen , etc . , acquitted himself conscientiously of his task .
he sometimes amused himself at the expense of his little pensioners by tweaking their tails ; but this was mischief , and not wickedness , for these little twisted tails amused him like a plaything , and his instinct was that of a child .
one day in this month of march , pencroft , talking to the engineer , reminded cyrus harding of a promise which the latter had not as yet had time to fulfil .
" certainly , captain .
after we have given ourselves necessaries , let us think a little of luxury .
for us it may be luxury , if you like , but for things it is necessary .
it is n't very convenient to climb up a long ladder when one is heavily loaded . "
" well , pencroft , we will try to please you , " replied cyrus harding .
" but you have no machine at your disposal . "
" we will make one . "
" a steam machine ? "
" no , a water machine . "
and , indeed , to work his apparatus there was already a natural force at the disposal of the engineer which could be used without great difficulty .
for this , it was enough to augment the flow of the little stream which supplied the interior of granite house with water .
the opening among the stones and grass was then increased , thus producing a strong fall at the bottom of the passage , the overflow from which escaped by the inner well .
below this fall the engineer fixed a cylinder with paddles , which was joined on the exterior with a strong cable rolled on a wheel , supporting a basket .
in this way , by means of a long rope reaching to the ground , which enabled them to regulate the motive power , they could rise in the basket to the door of granite house .
it was on the 17th of march that the lift acted for the first time , and gave universal satisfaction .
top particularly was enchanted with this improvement , for he had not , and never could have possessed master jup 's skill in climbing ladders , and often it was on neb 's back , or even on that of the orang that he had been obliged to make the ascent to granite house .
about this time , too , cyrus harding attempted to manufacture glass , and he at first put the old pottery - kiln to this new use .
there were some difficulties to be encountered ; but , after several fruitless attempts , he succeeded in setting up a glass manufactory , which gideon spilett and herbert , his usual assistants , did not leave for several days .
as to the substances used in the composition of glass , they are simply sand , chalk , and soda , either carbonate or sulphate .
cyrus harding thus soon had everything ready for setting to work .
the tool , the manufacture of which presented the most difficulty , was the pipe of the glass - maker , an iron tube , five or six feet long , which collects on one end the material in a state of fusion .
but by means of a long , thin piece of iron rolled up like the barrel of a gun , pencroft succeeded in making a tube soon ready for use .
on the 28th of march the tube was heated .
and herbert , swelling out his cheeks , blew so much and so well into the tube - taking care to twirl it round at the same time -- that his breath dilated the glassy mass .
harding then took the tube out of herbert 's hands , and , giving it a pendulous motion , he ended by lengthening the malleable bubble so as to give it a cylindroconic shape .
the blowing operation had given a cylinder of glass terminated by two hemispheric caps , which were easily detached by means of a sharp iron dipped in cold water ; then , by the same proceeding , this cylinder was cut lengthways , and after having been rendered malleable by a second heating , it was extended on a plate and spread out with a wooden roller .
the first pane was thus manufactured , and they had only to perform this operation fifty times to have fifty panes .
the windows at granite house were soon furnished with panes ; not very white , perhaps , but still sufficiently transparent .
" and what is this tree which resembles a little palm ? " asked harding .
" it is a ' cycas revoluta , ' of which i have a picture in our dictionary of natural history ! " said herbert .
" but i ca n't see any fruit on this shrub ! " observed his companion .
" no , captain , " replied herbert ; " but its stem contains a flour with which nature has provided us all ready ground . "
" it is , then , the bread - tree ? "
" yes , the bread - tree . "
" well , my boy , " replied the engineer , " this is a valuable discovery , since our wheat harvest is not yet ripe ; i hope that you are not mistaken ! "
herbert was not mistaken : he broke the stem of a cycas , which was composed of a glandulous tissue , containing a quantity of floury pith , traversed with woody fiber , separated by rings of the same substance , arranged concentrically .
with this fecula was mingled a mucilaginous juice of disagreeable flavor , but which it would be easy to get rid of by pressure .
this cellular substance was regular flour of a superior quality , extremely nourishing ; its exportation was formerly forbidden by the japanese laws .
cyrus harding and herbert , after having examined that part of the far west where the cycas grew , took their bearings , and returned to granite house , where they made known their discovery .
the engineer constructed a press , with which to extract the mucilaginous juice mingled with the fecula , and he obtained a large quantity of flour , which neb soon transformed into cakes and puddings .
this was not quite real wheaten bread , but it was very like it .
now , too , the onager , the goats , and the sheep in the corral furnished daily the milk necessary to the colony .
the cart , or rather a sort of light carriole which had replaced it , made frequent journeys to the corral , and when it was pencroft 's turn to go he took jup , and let him drive , and jup , cracking his whip , acquitted himself with his customary intelligence .
everything prospered , as well in the corral as in granite house , and certainly the settlers , if it had not been that they were so far from their native land , had no reason to complain .
they were so well suited to this life , and were , besides , so accustomed to the island , that they could not have left its hospitable soil without regret !
and yet so deeply is the love of his country implanted in the heart of man , that if a ship had unexpectedly come in sight of the island , the colonists would have made signals , would have attracted her attention , and would have departed !
it was the 1st of april , a sunday , easter day , which harding and his companions sanctified by rest and prayer .
the day was fine , such as an october day in the northern hemisphere might be .
all , towards the evening after dinner , were seated under the veranda on the edge of prospect heights , and they were watching the darkness creeping up from the horizon .
some cups of the infusion of elder - berries , which took the place of coffee , had been served by neb .
they were speaking of the island and of its isolated situation in the pacific , which led gideon spilett to say,--
" my dear cyrus , have you ever , since you possessed the sextant found in the case , again taken the position of our island ? "
" no , " replied the engineer .
" but it would perhaps be a good thing to do it with this instrument , which is more perfect than that which you before used . "
" what is the good ? " said pencroft .
" the island is quite comfortable where it is ! "
in south latitude : from 30deg . to 35deg .
the second gave exactly : in longitude : 150deg . 30 ' in south latitude : 34deg . 57 '
so then , notwithstanding the imperfection of his apparatus , cyrus harding had operated with so much skill that his error did not exceed five degrees .
" now , " said gideon spilett , " since we possess an atlas as well as a sextant , let us see , my dear cyrus , the exact position which lincoln island occupies in the pacific . "
herbert fetched the atlas , and the map of the pacific was opened , and the engineer , compass in hand , prepared to determine their position .
suddenly the compasses stopped , and he exclaimed ,
" but an island exists in this part of the pacific already ! "
" an island ? " cried pencroft .
" tabor island . "
" an important island ? "
" no , an islet lost in the pacific , and which perhaps has never been visited . "
" well , we will visit it , " said pencroft .
" we ? "
" about a hundred and fifty miles to the northeast , " replied harding .
" a hundred and fifty miles !
and what 's that ? " returned pencroft .
" in forty - eight hours , with a good wind , we should sight it ! "
and , on this reply , it was decided that a vessel should be constructed in time to be launched towards the month of next october , on the return of the fine season .
chapter 10
when pencroft had once got a plan in his head , he had no peace till it was executed .
now he wished to visit tabor island , and as a boat of a certain size was necessary for this voyage , he determined to build one .
what wood should he employ ?
these details settled , it was agreed that since the fine season would not return before six months , cyrus harding and pencroft should work alone at the boat .
gideon spilett and herbert were to continue to hunt , and neither neb nor master jup , his assistant , were to leave the domestic duties which had devolved upon them .
directly the trees were chosen , they were felled , stripped of their branches , and sawn into planks as well as sawyers would have been able to do it .
a week after , in the recess between the chimneys and the cliff , a dockyard was prepared , and a keel five - and - thirty feet long , furnished with a stern - post at the stern and a stem at the bows , lay along the sand .
cyrus harding was not working in the dark at this new trade .
he knew as much about ship - building as about nearly everything else , and he had at first drawn the model of his ship on paper .
besides , he was ably seconded by pencroft , who , having worked for several years in a dockyard in brooklyn , knew the practical part of the trade .
it was not until after careful calculation and deep thought that the timbers were laid on the keel .
pencroft , as may be believed , was all eagerness to carry out his new enterprise , and would not leave his work for an instant .
it was as much a success as the first , and yielded the number of grains which had been predicted .
" five bushels , captain , " said pencroft , after having scrupulously measured his treasure .
" five bushels , " replied the engineer ; " and a hundred and thirty thousand grains a bushel will make six hundred and fifty thousand grains . "
" well , we will sow them all this time , " said the sailor , " except a little in reserve . "
" yes , pencroft , and if the next crop gives a proportionate yield , we shall have four thousand bushels . "
" and shall we eat bread ? "
" we shall eat bread . "
" but we must have a mill .
" we will make one . "
the third corn - field was very much larger than the two first , and the soil , prepared with extreme care , received the precious seed .
that done , pencroft returned to his work .
during this time spilett and herbert hunted in the neighborhood , and they ventured deep into the still unknown parts of the far west , their guns loaded with ball , ready for any dangerous emergency .
it was a vast thicket of magnificent trees , crowded together as if pressed for room .
the exploration of these dense masses of wood was difficult in the extreme , and the reporter never ventured there without the pocket - compass , for the sun scarcely pierced through the thick foliage and it would have been very difficult for them to retrace their way .
gideon spilett was at first surprised at the odor which exhaled from certain plants with straight stalks , round and branchy , bearing grape - like clusters of flowers and very small berries .
the reporter broke off one or two of these stalks and returned to the lad , to whom he said,--
" what can this be , herbert ? "
" well , mr . spilett , " said herbert , " this is a treasure which will secure you pencroft 's gratitude forever . "
" is it tobacco ? "
" yes , and though it may not be of the first quality , it is none the less tobacco ! "
" oh , good old pencroft !
but we must not let him smoke it all , he must give us our share . "
" ah ! an idea occurs to me , mr . spilett , " replied herbert .
" do n't let us say anything to pencroft yet ; we will prepare these leaves , and one fine day we will present him with a pipe already filled ! "
" all right , herbert , and on that day our worthy companion will have nothing left to wish for in this world . "
the reporter and the lad secured a good store of the precious plant , and then returned to granite house , where they smuggled it in with as much precaution as if pencroft had been the most vigilant and severe of custom - house officers .
this took two months ; but all these manipulations were successfully carried on unknown to pencroft , for , occupied with the construction of his boat , he only returned to granite house at the hour of rest .
for some days they had observed an enormous animal two or three miles out in the open sea swimming around lincoln island .
this was a whale of the largest size , which apparently belonged to the southern species , called the " cape whale . "
" what a lucky chance it would be if we could capture it ! " cried the sailor .
" ah ! if we only had a proper boat and a good harpoon , i would say ' after the beast , ' for he would be well worth the trouble of catching ! "
" well , pencroft , " observed harding , " i should much like to watch you handling a harpoon .
it would be very interesting . "
" i am astonished , " said the reporter , " to see a whale in this comparatively high latitude . "
" why so , mr . spilett ? " replied herbert .
" we are exactly in that part of the pacific which english and american whalemen call the whale field , and it is here , between new zealand and south america , that the whales of the southern hemisphere are met with in the greatest numbers . "
and pencroft returned to his work , not without uttering a sigh of regret , for every sailor is a born fisherman , and if the pleasure of fishing is in exact proportion to the size of the animal , one can judge how a whaler feels in sight of a whale .
and if this had only been for pleasure !
but they could not help feeling how valuable such a prize would have been to the colony , for the oil , fat , and bones would have been put to many uses .
the cetacean , having entered far into union bay , made rapid furrows across it from mandible cape to claw cape , propelled by its enormously powerful flukes , on which it supported itself , and making its way through the water at the rate little short of twelve knots an hour .
sometimes also it approached so near to the island that it could be clearly distinguished .
it was the southern whale , which is completely black , the head being more depressed than that of the northern whale .
they could also see it throwing up from its air - holes to a great height a cloud of vapor , or of water , for , strange as it may appear , naturalists and whalers are not agreed on this subject .
is it air or is it water which is thus driven out ?
it is generally admitted to be vapor , which , condensing suddenly by contact with the cold air , falls again as rain .
but what the colonists could not do for themselves chance did for them , and on the 3rd of may shouts from neb , who had stationed himself at the kitchen window , announced that the whale was stranded on the beach of the island .
herbert and gideon spilett , who were just about to set out hunting , left their guns , pencroft threw down his ax , and harding and neb joining their companions , all rushed towards the scene of action .
the stranding had taken place on the beach of flotsam point , three miles from granite house , and at high tide .
they ran with pick - axes and iron - tipped poles in their hands , passed over the mercy bridge , descended the right bank of the river , along the beach , and in less than twenty minutes the settlers were close to the enormous animal , above which flocks of birds already hovered .
" what a monster ! " cried neb .
and the exclamation was natural , for it was a southern whale , eighty feet long , a giant of the species , probably not weighing less than a hundred and fifty thousand pounds !
in the meanwhile , the monster thus stranded did not move , nor attempt by struggling to regain the water while the tide was still high .
it was dead , and a harpoon was sticking out of its left side .
" there are whalers in these quarters , then ? " said gideon spilett directly .
" oh , mr . spilett , that does n't prove anything ! " replied pencroft .
pencroft , having torn the harpoon from the animal 's side , read this inscription on it :
" a vessel from the vineyard !
a ship from my country ! " he cried .
" the ' maria stella ! '
a fine whaler , ' pon my word ; i know her well !
oh , my friends , a vessel from the vineyard!--a whaler from the vineyard ! "
and the sailor brandishing the harpoon , repeated , not without emotion , the name which he loved so well -- the name of his birthplace .
but as it could not be expected that the " maria stella " would come to reclaim the animal harpooned by her , they resolved to begin cutting it up before decomposition should commence .
the whale was a female , and a large quantity of milk was taken from it , which , according to the opinion of the naturalist duffenbach , might pass for cow 's milk , and , indeed , it differs from it neither in taste , color , nor density .
pencroft had formerly served on board a whaling - ship , and he could methodically direct the operation of cutting up , a sufficiently disagreeable operation lasting three days , but from which the settlers did not flinch , not even gideon spilett , who , as the sailor said , would end by making a " real good castaway . "
the blubber , cut in parallel slices of two feet and a half in thickness , then divided into pieces which might weigh about a thousand pounds each , was melted down in large earthen pots brought to the spot , for they did not wish to taint the environs of granite house , and in this fusion it lost nearly a third of its weight .
but there was an immense quantity of it ; the tongue alone yielded six thousand pounds of oil , and the lower lip four thousand .
then , besides the fat , which would insure for a long time a store of stearine and glycerine , there were still the bones , for which a use could doubtless be found , although there were neither umbrellas nor stays used at granite house .
the upper part of the mouth of the cetacean was , indeed , provided on both sides with eight hundred horny blades , very elastic , of a fibrous texture , and fringed at the edge like great combs , at which the teeth , six feet long , served to retain the thousands of animalculae , little fish , and molluscs , on which the whale fed .
however , before returning to the dockyard , cyrus harding conceived the idea of fabricating certain machines , which greatly excited the curiosity of his companions .
he took a dozen of the whale 's bones , cut them into six equal parts , and sharpened their ends .
" this machine is not my own invention , and it is frequently employed by the aleutian hunters in russian america .
you see these bones , my friends ; well , when it freezes , i will bend them , and then wet them with water till they are entirely covered with ice , which will keep them bent , and i will strew them on the snow , having previously covered them with fat .
now , what will happen if a hungry animal swallows one of these baits ?
why , the heat of his stomach will melt the ice , and the bone , springing straight , will pierce him with its sharp points . " " well !
i do call that ingenious ! " said pencroft .
" and it will spare the powder and shot , " rejoined cyrus harding .
" that will be better than traps ! " added neb .
in the meanwhile the boat - building progressed , and towards the end of the month half the planking was completed .
it could already be seen that her shape was excellent , and that she would sail well .
pencroft worked with unparalleled ardor , and only a sturdy frame could have borne such fatigue ; but his companions were preparing in secret a reward for his labors , and on the 31st of may he was to meet with one of the greatest joys of his life .
on that day , after dinner , just as he was about to leave the table , pencroft felt a hand on his shoulder .
it was the hand of gideon spilett , who said,--
" one moment , master pencroft , you must n't sneak off like that !
you 've forgotten your dessert . "
" thank you , mr . spilett , " replied the sailor , " i am going back to my work . "
" well , a cup of coffee , my friend ? "
" nothing more . "
" a pipe , then ? "
pencroft jumped up , and his great good - natured face grew pale when he saw the reporter presenting him with a ready - filled pipe , and herbert with a glowing coal .
the sailor endeavored to speak , but could not get out a word ; so , seizing the pipe , he carried it to his lips , then applying the coal , he drew five or six great whiffs .
a fragrant blue cloud soon arose , and from its depths a voice was heard repeating excitedly,--
" tobacco ! real tobacco ! "
" yes , pencroft , " returned cyrus harding , " and very good tobacco too ! "
" o , divine providence ; sacred author of all things ! " cried the sailor .
" nothing more is now wanting to our island . "
and pencroft smoked , and smoked , and smoked .
" and who made this discovery ? " he asked at length .
" you , herbert , no doubt ? "
" no , pencroft , it was mr . spilett . "
" oh pencroft , " said spilett , recovering his breath at last , " a truce for one moment .
you must share your gratitude with herbert , who recognized the plant , with cyrus , who prepared it , and with neb , who took a great deal of trouble to keep our secret . "
" well , my friends , i will repay you some day , " replied the sailor .
" now we are friends for life . "
chapter 11
the musmons in the corral had been stripped of their wool , and this precious textile material was now to be transformed into stuff .
and indeed he proposed to make use of the property which the filaments of wool possess when subjected to a powerful pressure of mixing together , and of manufacturing by this simple process the material called felt .
this felt could then be obtained by a simple operation which , if it diminished the flexibility of the stuff , increased its power of retaining heat in proportion .
now the wool furnished by the musmons was composed of very short hairs , and was in a good condition to be felted .
the engineer , aided by his companions , including pencroft , who was once more obliged to leave his boat , commenced the preliminary operations , the subject of which was to rid the wool of that fat and oily substance with which it is impregnated , and which is called grease .
this cleaning was done in vats filled with water , which was maintained at the temperature of seventy degrees , and in which the wool was soaked for four - and - twenty hours ; it was then thoroughly washed in baths of soda , and , when sufficiently dried by pressure , it was in a state to be compressed , that is to say , to produce a solid material , rough , no doubt , and such as would have no value in a manufacturing center of europe or america , but which would be highly esteemed in the lincoln island markets .
this sort of material must have been known from the most ancient times , and , in fact , the first woolen stuffs were manufactured by the process which harding was now about to employ .
where harding 's engineering qualifications now came into play was in the construction of the machine for pressing the wool ; for he knew how to turn ingeniously to profit the mechanical force , hitherto unused , which the waterfall on the beach possessed to move a fulling - mill .
the operation , ably directed by cyrus harding , was a complete success .
the roughnesses with which the staple of wool is naturally filled were so thoroughly entangled and interlaced together that a material was formed equally suitable either for garments or bedclothes .
the colonists had now warm garments and thick bedclothes , and they could without fear await the approach of the winter of 1866 - 67 .
the severe cold began to be felt about the 20th of june , and , to his great regret , pencroft was obliged to suspend his boat - building , which he hoped to finish in time for next spring .
a voyage of a hundred and fifty miles in a comparatively small vessel , over unknown seas , could not but cause him some anxiety .
suppose that their vessel , once out at sea , should be unable to reach tabor island , and could not return to lincoln island , what would become of her in the midst of the pacific , so fruitful of disasters ?
harding often talked over this project with pencroft , and he found him strangely bent upon undertaking this voyage , for which determination he himself could give no sufficient reason .
" now , " said the engineer one day to him , " i must observe , my friend , that after having said so much , in praise of lincoln island , after having spoken so often of the sorrow you would feel if you were obliged to forsake it , you are the first to wish to leave it . "
" but it is not nearly as good as lincoln island . "
" i know that beforehand . "
" then why venture there ? "
" to know what is going on in tabor island . "
" but nothing is going on there ; nothing could happen there . "
" who knows ? "
" and if you are caught in a hurricane ? "
" there is no fear of that in the fine season , " replied pencroft .
" pencroft , " replied the engineer , placing his hand on the sailor 's shoulder , " if any misfortune happens to you , or to this lad , whom chance has made our child , do you think we could ever cease to blame ourselves ? "
" captain harding , " replied pencroft , with unshaken confidence , " we shall not cause you that sorrow .
besides , we will speak further of this voyage , when the time comes to make it .
and i fancy , when you have seen our tight - rigged little craft , when you have observed how she behaves at sea , when we sail round our island , for we will do so together -- i fancy , i say , that you will no longer hesitate to let me go .
the conversation ended thus , to be resumed later on , without convincing either the sailor or the engineer .
the first snow fell towards the end of the month of june .
traps were again set , and the machines manufactured by harding were tried .
the bent whalebones , imprisoned in a case of ice , and covered with a thick outer layer of fat , were placed on the border of the forest at a spot where animals usually passed on their way to the lake .
to the engineer 's great satisfaction , this invention , copied from the aleutian fishermen , succeeded perfectly .
a dozen foxes , a few wild boars , and even a jaguar , were taken in this way , the animals being found dead , their stomachs pierced by the unbent bones .
gideon spilett had already several times pondered whether to throw into the sea a letter enclosed in a bottle , which currents might perhaps carry to an inhabited coast , or to confide it to pigeons .
but how could it be seriously hoped that either pigeons or bottles could cross the distance of twelve hundred miles which separated the island from any inhabited land ?
it would have been pure folly .
what a success for the authorized reporter of the new york herald , and for the number which should contain the article , if it should ever reach the address of its editor , the honorable james bennett !
gideon spilett then wrote out a concise account , which was placed in a strong waterproof bag , with an earnest request to whoever might find it to forward it to the office of the new york herald .
" where is he going to ? " asked pencroft .
" towards new zealand , " replied herbert .
" a good voyage to you , " shouted the sailor , who himself did not expect any great result from this mode of correspondence .
with the winter , work had been resumed in the interior of granite house , mending clothes and different occupations , among others making the sails for their vessel , which were cut from the inexhaustible balloon - case .
during the month of july the cold was intense , but there was no lack of either wood or coal .
cyrus harding had established a second fireplace in the dining - room , and there the long winter evenings were spent .
talking while they worked , reading when the hands remained idle , the time passed with profit to all .
it was real enjoyment to the settlers when in their room , well lighted with candles , well warmed with coal , after a good dinner , elderberry coffee smoking in the cups , the pipes giving forth an odoriferous smoke , they could hear the storm howling without .
their comfort would have been complete , if complete comfort could ever exist for those who are far from their fellow - creatures , and without any means of communication with them .
" but now , my dear cyrus , all this industrial and commercial movement to which you predict a continual advance , does it not run the danger of being sooner or later completely stopped ? "
" stopped !
and by what ? "
" by the want of coal , which may justly be called the most precious of minerals . "
" yes , the most precious indeed , " replied the engineer ; " and it would seem that nature wished to prove that it was so by making the diamond , which is simply pure carbon crystallized . "
" you do n't mean to say , captain , " interrupted pencroft , " that we burn diamonds in our stoves in the shape of coal ? "
" no , my friend , " replied harding .
" however , " resumed gideon spilett , " you do not deny that some day the coal will be entirely consumed ? "
" oh ! the veins of coal are still considerable , and the hundred thousand miners who annually extract from them a hundred millions of hundredweights have not nearly exhausted them . "
" with the increasing consumption of coal , " replied gideon spilett , " it can be foreseen that the hundred thousand workmen will soon become two hundred thousand , and that the rate of extraction will be doubled . "
" doubtless ; but after the european mines , which will be soon worked more thoroughly with new machines , the american and australian mines will for a long time yet provide for the consumption in trade . "
" for how long a time ? " asked the reporter .
" for at least two hundred and fifty or three hundred years . "
" that is reassuring for us , but a bad look - out for our great - grandchildren ! " observed pencroft .
" they will discover something else , " said herbert .
" it is to be hoped so , " answered spilett , " for without coal there would be no machinery , and without machinery there would be no railways , no steamers , no manufactories , nothing of that which is indispensable to modern civilization ! "
" but what will they find ? " asked pencroft .
" can you guess , captain ? "
" nearly , my friend . "
" and what will they burn instead of coal ? "
" water , " replied harding .
" water ! " cried pencroft , " water as fuel for steamers and engines ! water to heat water ! "
" yes , but water decomposed into its primitive elements , " replied cyrus harding , " and decomposed doubtless , by electricity , which will then have become a powerful and manageable force , for all great discoveries , by some inexplicable laws , appear to agree and become complete at the same time .
yes , my friends , i believe that water will one day be employed as fuel , that hydrogen and oxygen which constitute it , used singly or together , will furnish an inexhaustible source of heat and light , of an intensity of which coal is not capable .
some day the coalrooms of steamers and the tenders of locomotives will , instead of coal , be stored with these two condensed gases , which will burn in the furnaces with enormous calorific power .
i believe , then , that when the deposits of coal are exhausted we shall heat and warm ourselves with water .
water will be the coal of the future . "
" i should like to see that , " observed the sailor .
" you were born too soon , pencroft , " returned neb , who only took part in the discussion by these words .
at the same time top began to run round the mouth of the well , which opened at the extremity of the interior passage .
" what can top be barking in that way for ? " asked pencroft .
" and jup be growling like that ? " added herbert .
in fact the orang , joining the dog , gave unequivocal signs of agitation , and , singular to say , the two animals appeared more uneasy than angry .
" it is evident , " said gideon spilett , " that this well is in direct communication with the sea , and that some marine animal comes from time to time to breathe at the bottom . "
" that 's evident , " replied the sailor , " and there can be no other explanation to give . quiet there , top ! " added pencroft , turning to the dog , " and you , jup , be off to your room ! "
the ape and the dog were silent .
jup went off to bed , but top remained in the room , and continued to utter low growls at intervals during the rest of the evening .
there was no further talk on the subject , but the incident , however , clouded the brow of the engineer .
during the remainder of the month of july there was alternate rain and frost .
the temperature was not so low as during the preceding winter , and its maximum did not exceed eight degrees fahrenheit .
at times it almost seemed as if an under - current raised these monstrous billows which thundered against the wall of granite house .
when the settlers , leaning from their windows , gazed on the huge watery masses breaking beneath their eyes , they could not but admire the magnificent spectacle of the ocean in its impotent fury .
the waves rebounded in dazzling foam , the beach entirely disapppearing under the raging flood , and the cliff appearing to emerge from the sea itself , the spray rising to a height of more than a hundred feet .
during these storms it was difficult and even dangerous to venture out , owing to the frequently falling trees ; however , the colonists never allowed a week to pass without having paid a visit to the corral .
the pigeon - house was twice unroofed and the paling blown down .
all this required to be remade more solidly than before , for , as may be clearly seen , lincoln island was situated in one of the most dangerous parts of the pacific .
it really appeared as if it formed the central point of vast cyclones , which beat it perpetually as the whip does the top , only here it was the top which was motionless and the whip which moved .
during the first week of the month of august the weather became more moderate , and the atmosphere recovered the calm which it appeared to have lost forever .
on the 3rd of august an excursion which had been talked of for several days was made into the southeastern part of the island , towards tadorn marsh .
not only gideon spilett and herbert , but pencroft and neb also took part in this excursion .
cyrus harding alone , alleging some work as an excuse , did not join them , but remained at granite house .
the hunters proceeded in the direction of port balloon , in order to reach the marsh , after having promised to be back by the evening .
as soon as they had passed over the mercy bridge , the engineer raised it and returned , intending to put into execution a project for the performance of which he wished to be alone .
why did top so often run round this opening ?
why did he utter such strange barks when a sort of uneasiness seemed to draw him towards this well ?
why did jup join top in a sort of common anxiety ?
had this well branches besides the communication with the sea ?
did it spread towards other parts of the island ?
he had resolved , therefore , to attempt the exploration of the well during the absence of his companions , and an opportunity for doing so had now presented itself .
it was easy to descend to the bottom of the well by employing the rope ladder which had not been used since the establishment of the lift .
the engineer drew the ladder to the hole , the diameter of which measured nearly six feet , and allowed it to unroll itself after having securely fastened its upper extremity .
then , having lighted a lantern , taken a revolver , and placed a cutlass in his belt , he began the descent .
the sides were everywhere entire ; but points of rock jutted out here and there , and by means of these points it would have been quite possible for an active creature to climb to the mouth of the well .
cyrus harding descended deeper , throwing the light of his lantern on all sides .
he saw nothing suspicious .
when the engineer had reached the last rounds he came upon the water , which was then perfectly calm .
neither at its level nor in any other part of the well , did any passage open , which could lead to the interior of the cliff .
the wall which harding struck with the hilt of his cutlass sounded solid .
it was compact granite , through which no living being could force a way .
to arrive at the bottom of the well and then climb up to its mouth it was necessary to pass through the channel under the rocky subsoil of the beach , which placed it in communication with the sea , and this was only possible for marine animals .
as to the question of knowing where this channel ended , at what point of the shore , and at what depth beneath the water , it could not be answered .
then cyrus harding , having ended his survey , re - ascended , drew up the ladder , covered the mouth of the well , and returned thoughtfully to the diningroom , saying to himself,-- " i have seen nothing , and yet there is something there ! "
chapter 12
in the evening the hunters returned , having enjoyed good sport , and being literally loaded with game ; indeed , they had as much as four men could possibly carry .
top wore a necklace of teal and jup wreaths of snipe round his body .
i count on you , pencroft . "
" no , neb , " replied the sailor ; " i have the rigging of the vessel to finish and to look after , and you will have to do without me . "
" and you , mr . herbert ? "
" i must go to the corral to - morrow , neb , " replied the lad .
" it will be you then , mr . spilett , who will help me ? "
" to oblige you , neb , i will , " replied the reporter ; " but i warn you that if you disclose your recipes to me , i shall publish them . "
" whenever you like , mr . spilett , " replied neb ; " whenever you like . "
and so the next day gideon spilett became neb 's assistant and was installed in his culinary laboratory .
the engineer had previously made known to him the result of the exploration which he had made the day before , and on this point the reporter shared harding 's opinion , that although he had found nothing , a secret still remained to be discovered !
the frost continued for another week , and the settlers did not leave granite house unless to look after the poultry - yard .
the dwelling was filled with appetizing odors , which were emitted from the learned manipulation of neb and the reporter . but all the results of the chase were not made into preserved provisions ; and as the game kept perfectly in the intense cold , wild duck and other fowl were eaten fresh , and declared superior to all other aquatic birds in the known world .
to the sails were attached strong bolt ropes , and there still remained enough from which to make the halyards , shrouds , and sheets , etc .
it therefore happened that the rigging was entirely prepared before the vessel was finished .
" and , " said he , " it is so already in heart , if not in deed ! " in the meantime , the flag was hoisted at the central window of granite house , and the settlers saluted it with three cheers .
the cold season was now almost at an end , and it appeared as if this second winter was to pass without any unusual occurrence , when on the night of the 11th of august , the plateau of prospect heights was menaced with complete destruction .
after a busy day the colonists were sleeping soundly , when towards four o'clock in the morning they were suddenly awakened by top 's barking .
the dog was not this time barking near the mouth of the well , but at the threshold of the door , at which he was scratching as if he wished to burst it open .
jup was also uttering piercing cries .
" hello , top ! " cried neb , who was the first awake .
but the dog continued to bark more furiously than ever .
" what 's the matter now ? " asked harding .
and all dressing in haste rushed to the windows , which they opened .
beneath their eyes was spread a sheet of snow which looked gray in the dim light .
the settlers could see nothing , but they heard a singular yelping noise away in the darkness .
it was evident that the beach had been invaded by a number of animals which could not be seen .
" what are they ? " cried pencroft .
" wolves , jaguars , or apes ? " replied neb .
" they have nearly reached the plateau , " said the reporter .
" and our poultry - yard , " exclaimed herbert , " and our garden ! "
" where can they have crossed ? " asked pencroft .
" they must have crossed the bridge on the shore , " replied the engineer , " which one of us must have forgotten to close . "
" true , " said spilett , " i remember having left it open . "
" a fine job you have made of it , mr . spilett , " cried the sailor .
" what is done can not be undone , " replied cyrus harding .
" we must consult what it will now be best to do . "
such were the questions and answers which were rapidly exchanged between harding and his companions .
" but what are these beasts ? " was asked a second time , as the yelpings were again heard more loudly than before .
these yelps made herbert start , and he remembered having heard them before during his first visit to the sources of the red creek .
" they are colpeo foxes ! " he exclaimed .
" forward ! " shouted the sailor .
and all arming themselves with hatchets , carbines , and revolvers , threw themselves into the lift and soon set foot on the shore .
the chief thing was to hinder these plunderers from reaching the plateau , for the garden and the poultry - yard would then have been at their mercy , and immense , perhaps irreparable mischief , would inevitably be the result , especially with regard to the corn - field .
this was plain to all , and , by cyrus harding 's orders , they reached the spot indicated by him , while the colpeos rushed fiercely through the gloom .
harding , gideon spilett , herbert , pencroft and neb posted themselves in impregnable line .
top , his formidable jaws open , preceded the colonists , and he was followed by jup , armed with knotty cudgel , which he brandished like a club .
the night was extremely dark , it was only by the flashes from the revolvers as each person fired that they could see their assailants , who were at least a hundred in number , and whose eyes were glowing like hot coals .
" they must not pass ! " shouted pencroft .
" they shall not pass ! " returned the engineer .
but if they did not pass it was not for want of having attempted it .
those in the rear pushed on the foremost assailants , and it was an incessant struggle with revolvers and hatchets .
several colpeos already lay dead on the ground , but their number did not appear to diminish , and it might have been supposed that reinforcements were continually arriving over the bridge .
the colonists were soon obliged to fight at close quarters , not without receiving some wounds , though happily very slight ones .
herbert had , with a shot from his revolver , rescued neb , on whose back a colpeo had sprung like a tiger cat .
top fought with actual fury , flying at the throats of the foxes and strangling them instantaneously .
jup wielded his weapon valiantly , and it was in vain that they endeavored to keep him in the rear .
endowed doubtless with sight which enabled him to pierce the obscurity , he was always in the thick of the fight uttering from time to time -- a sharp hissing sound , which was with him the sign of great rejoicing .
at one moment he advanced so far , that by the light from a revolver he was seen surrounded by five or six large colpeos , with whom he was coping with great coolness .
the first signs of the approach of day doubtless determined the retreat of their assailants , who scampered away towards the north , passing over the bridge , which neb ran immediately to raise .
when day had sufficiently lighted up the field of battle , the settlers counted as many as fifty dead bodies scattered about on the shore .
" and jup ! " cried pencroft ; " where is jup ? "
jup had disappeared .
his friend neb called him , and for the first time jup did not reply to his friend 's call .
poor jup still held in his hand the stump of his broken cudgel , but deprived of his weapon he had been overpowered by numbers , and his chest was covered with severe wounds .
" he is living , " cried neb , who was bending over him .
" and we will save him , " replied the sailor . " we will nurse him as if he was one of ourselves . "
it appeared as if jup understood , for he leaned his head on pencroft 's shoulder as if to thank him .
the sailor was wounded himself , but his wound was insignificant , as were those of his companions ; for thanks to their firearms they had been almost always able to keep their assailants at a distance .
he was gently drawn up to granite house .
it did not appear that any vital part had been reached , but jup was very weak from loss of blood , and a high fever soon set in after his wounds had been dressed .
he was laid down , strict diet was imposed , " just like a real person , " as neb said , and they made him swallow several cups of a cooling drink , for which the ingredients were supplied from the vegetable medicine chest of granite house .
jup was at first restless , but his breathing gradually became more regular , and he was left sleeping quietly .
from time to time top , walking on tip - toe , as one might say , came to visit his friend , and seemed to approve of all the care that had been taken of him .
one of jup 's hands hung over the side of his bed , and top licked it with a sympathizing air .
they employed the day in interring the dead , who were dragged to the forest of the far west , and there buried deep .
this attack , which might have had such serious consequences , was a lesson to the settlers , who from this time never went to bed until one of their number had made sure that all the bridges were raised , and that no invasion was possible .
however , jup , after having given them serious anxiety for several days , began to recover .
his constitution brought him through , the fever gradually subsided , and gideon spilett , who was a bit of a doctor , pronounced him quite out of danger .
ten days after taking to his bed , on the 21st of august , master jup arose .
his wounds were healed , and it was evident that he would not be long in regaining his usual strength and agility .
like all convalescents , he was tremendously hungry , and the reporter allowed him to eat as much as he liked , for he trusted to that instinct , which is too often wanting in reasoning beings , to keep the orang from any excess .
neb was delighted to see his pupil 's appetite returning .
" eat away , my jup , " said he , " and do n't spare anything ; you have shed your blood for us , and it is the least i can do to make you strong again ! "
on the 25th of august neb 's voice was heard calling to his companions .
" captain , mr . spilett , mr . herbert , pencroft , come ! come ! "
the colonists , who were together in the dining - room , rose at neb 's call , who was then in jup 's room .
" what 's the matter ? " asked the reporter .
" look , " replied neb , with a shout of laughter .
master jup smoking calmly and seriously , sitting crosslegged like a turk at the entrance to granite house !
" my pipe , " cried pencroft .
" he has taken my pipe !
hello , my honest jup , i make you a present of it !
smoke away , old boy , smoke away ! "
and jup gravely puffed out clouds of smoke which seemed to give him great satisfaction .
harding did not appear to be much astonished at this incident , and he cited several examples of tame apes , to whom the use of tobacco had become quite familiar .
but from this day master jup had a pipe of his own , the sailor 's ex - pipe , which was hung in his room near his store of tobacco .
he filled it himself , lighted it with a glowing coal , and appeared to be the happiest of quadrumana .
it may readily be understood that this similarity of tastes of jup and pencroft served to tighten the bonds of friendship which already existed between the honest ape and the worthy sailor .
" perhaps he is really a man , " said pencroft sometimes to neb .
" should you be surprised to hear him beginning to speak to us some day ? "
" my word , no , " replied neb .
" what astonishes me is that he has n't spoken to us before , for now he wants nothing but speech ! "
" it would amuse me all the same , " resumed the sailor , " if some fine day he said to me , ' suppose we change pipes , pencroft . ' "
" yes , " replied neb , " what a pity he was born dumb ! "
with the month of september the winter ended , and the works were again eagerly commenced .
the building of the vessel advanced rapidly , she was already completely decked over , and all the inside parts of the hull were firmly united with ribs bent by means of steam , which answered all the purposes of a mold .
as there was no want of wood , pencroft proposed to the engineer to give a double lining to the hull , to insure the strength of the vessel .
harding , not knowing what the future might have in store for them , approved the sailor 's idea of making the craft as strong as possible .
the interior and deck of the vessel was entirely finished towards the 15th of september .
the management of the vessel was very simple .
she had from the first been ballasted with heavy blocks of granite walled up , in a bed of lime , twelve thousand pounds of which they stowed away .
a deck was placed over this ballast , and the interior was divided into two cabins ; two benches extended along them and served also as lockers .
the foot of the mast supported the partition which separated the two cabins , which were reached by two hatchways let into the deck .
pencroft had no trouble in finding a tree suitable for the mast .
he chose a straight young fir , with no knots , and which he had only to square at the step , and round off at the top .
the ironwork of the mast , the rudder and the hull had been roughly but strongly forged at the chimneys .
lastly , yards , masts , boom , spars , oars , etc . , were all furnished by the first week in october , and it was agreed that a trial trip should be taken round the island , so as to ascertain how the vessel would behave at sea , and how far they might depend upon her .
during all this time the necessary works had not been neglected .
the corral was enlarged , for the flock of musmons and goats had been increased by a number of young ones , who had to be housed and fed .
the colonists had paid visits also to the oyster bed , the warren , the coal and iron mines , and to the till then unexplored districts of the far west forest , which abounded in game .
certain indigenous plants were discovered , and those fit for immediate use contributed to vary the vegetable stores of granite house .
they were a species of ficoide , some similar to those of the cape , with eatable fleshy leaves , others bearing seeds containing a sort of flour .
pencroft was radiant with joy , the operation was perfectly successful ; the boat completely rigged , having been pushed on rollers to the water 's edge , was floated by the rising tide , amid the cheers of the colonists , particularly of pencroft , who showed no modesty on this occasion .
besides his importance was to last beyond the finishing of the vessel , since , after having built her , he was to command her .
the grade of captain was bestowed upon him with the approbation of all .
to satisfy captain pencroft , it was now necessary to give a name to the vessel , and , after many propositions had been discussed , the votes were all in favor of the " bonadventure . "
as soon as the " bonadventure " had been lifted by the rising tide , it was seen that she lay evenly in the water , and would be easily navigated .
however , the trial trip was to be made that very day , by an excursion off the coast .
" all hands on board , " shouted pencroft ; but breakfast was first necessary , and it was thought best to take provisions on board , in the event of their excursion being prolonged until the evening .
he would have indeed great reluctance in letting two or three of his companions venture so far in so small a boat , which was not of more than fifteen tons ' burden .
pencroft now stood off the shore , three or four miles across from port balloon .
" how beautiful it is ! " cried herbert .
it received us poor and destitute , and now what is wanting to us five fellows who fell on it from the sky ? "
" nothing , " replied neb ; " nothing , captain . "
and the two brave men gave three tremendous cheers in honor of their island !
during all this time gideon spilett , leaning against the mast , sketched the panorama which was developed before his eyes .
cyrus harding gazed on it in silence .
" well , captain harding , " asked pencroft , " what do you think of our vessel ? "
" she appears to behave well , " replied the engineer .
" good !
and do you think now that she could undertake a voyage of some extent ? "
" what voyage , pencroft ? "
" one to tabor island , for instance . "
" my friend , " replied harding , " i think that in any pressing emergency we need not hesitate to trust ourselves to the ' bonadventure ' even for a longer voyage ; but you know i should see you set off to tabor island with great uneasiness , since nothing obliges you to go there . "
" one likes to know one 's neighbors , " returned the sailor , who was obstinate in his idea .
" tabor island is our neighbor , and the only one !
politeness requires us to go at least to pay a visit . "
" by jove , " said spilett , " our friend pencroft has become very particular about the proprieties all at once ! "
" i am not particular about anything at all , " retorted the sailor , who was rather vexed by the engineer 's opposition , but who did not wish to cause him anxiety .
" consider , pencroft , " resumed harding , " you can not go alone to tabor island . "
" one companion will be enough for me . "
" even so , " replied the engineer , " you will risk depriving the colony of lincoln island of two settlers out of five . "
" out of six , " answered pencroft ; " you forget jup . "
" out of seven , " added neb ; " top is quite worth another . "
" there is no risk at all in it , captain , " replied pencroft .
" that is possible , pencroft ; but i repeat it is to expose ourselves uselessly . "
the obstinate sailor did not reply , and let the conversation drop , quite determined to resume it again .
but he did not suspect that an incident would come to his aid and change into an act of humanity that which was at first only a doubtful whim .
after standing off the shore the " bonadventure " again approached it in the direction of port balloon .
it was important to ascertain the channels between the sandbanks and reefs , that buoys might be laid down since this little creek was to be the harbor .
herbert had stationed himself in the bows that he might indicate the course to be followed among the channels , when all at once he shouted,--
" luff , pencroft , luff ! "
" what 's the matter , " replied the sailor ; " a rock ? "
so saying , herbert , leaning over the side , plunged his arm into the water , and pulled it out , exclaiming,--
" a bottle ! "
he held in his hand a corked bottle which he had just seized a few cables ' length from the shore .
" castaway .... tabor island : 153deg w. long . , 37deg 11 ' s. lat . "
" a castaway ! " exclaimed pencroft ; " left on this tabor island not two hundred miles from us !
ah , captain harding , you wo n't now oppose my going . "
" no , pencroft , " replied cyrus harding ; " and you shall set out as soon as possible . "
" to - morrow ? "
" to - morrow ! "
the engineer still held in his hand the paper which he had taken from the bottle .
he contemplated it for some instants , then resumed ,
" from this document , my friends , from the way in which it is worded , we may conclude this : first , that the castaway on tabor island is a man possessing a considerable knowledge of navigation , since he gives the latitude and longitude of the island exactly as we ourselves found it , and to a second of approximation ; secondly , that he is either english or american , as the document is written in the english language . "
" that is perfectly logical , " answered spilett ; " and the presence of this castaway explains the arrival of the case on the shores of our island .
" indeed , " said herbert , " it is a fortunate chance that the ' bonadventure ' passed exactly where the bottle was still floating ! "
" does not this appear strange to you ? " asked harding of pencroft .
" it appears fortunate , that 's all , " answered the sailor .
" do you see anything extraordinary in it , captain ?
the bottle must go somewhere , and why not here as well as anywhere else ? "
" perhaps you are right , pencroft , " replied the engineer ; " and yet-- "
" but , " observed herbert , " there 's nothing to prove that this bottle has been floating long in the sea . "
" nothing , " replied gideon spilett , " and the document appears even to have been recently written .
what do you think about it , cyrus ? "
every one was thinking of the castaway on tabor island .
should they be in time to save him ?
this was a great event in the life of the colonists !
they themselves were but castaways , but it was to be feared that another might not have been so fortunate , and their duty was to go to his succor .
claw cape was doubled , and about four o'clock the " bonadventure " dropped her anchor at the mouth of the mercy .
that same evening the arrangements for the new expedition were made .
it appeared best that pencroft and herbert , who knew how to work the vessel , should undertake the voyage alone .
by setting out the next day , the 10th of october , they would arrive on the 13th , for with the present wind it would not take more than forty - eight hours to make this passage of a hundred and fifty miles .
one day in the island , three or four to return , they might hope therefore that on the 17th they would again reach lincoln island .
the weather was fine , the barometer was rising , the wind appeared settled , everything then was in favor of these brave men whom an act of humanity was taking far from their island .
thus it had been agreed that cyrus harding , neb , and gideon spilett should remain at granite house , but an objection was raised , and spilett , who had not forgotten his business as reporter to the new york herald , having declared that he would go by swimming rather than lose such an opportunity , he was admitted to take a part in the voyage .
the next day , at five o'clock in the morning , the farewells were said , not without some emotion on both sides , and pencroft setting sail made towards claw cape , which had to be doubled in order to proceed to the southwest .
the " bonadventure " was already a quarter of a mile from the coast when the passengers perceived on the heights of granite house two men waving their farewells ; they were cyrus harding and neb .
" our friends , " exclaimed spilett , " this is our first separation in fifteen months . "
pencroft , the reporter and herbert waved in return , and granite house soon disappeared behind the high rocks of the cape .
during the first part of the day the " bonadventure " was still in sight of the southern coast of lincoln island , which soon appeared just like a green basket , with mount franklin rising from the center .
the heights , diminished by distance , did not present an appearance likely to tempt vessels to touch there .
the " bonadventure " behaved capitally .
bounding over the waves she proceeded rapidly on her course .
pencroft had hoisted the foresail , and steering by the compass followed a rectilinear direction .
from time to time herbert relieved him at the helm , and the lad 's hand was so firm that the sailor had not a point to find fault with .
pencroft and herbert took turns for a spell of two hours each at the helm .
the sailor trusted herbert as he would himself , and his confidence was justified by the coolness and judgment of the lad .
pencroft gave him his directions as a commander to his steersman , and herbert never allowed the " bonadventure " to swerve even a point . the night passed quickly , as did the day of the 12th of october .
as to the sea over which the vessel was then sailing , it was absolutely deserted .
now and then a great albatross or frigate bird passed within gunshot , and gideon spilett wondered if it was to one of them that he had confided his last letter addressed to the new york herald .
these birds were the only beings that appeared to frequent this part of the ocean between tabor and lincoln islands .
" and yet , " observed herbert , " this is the time that whalers usually proceed towards the southern part of the pacific .
indeed i do not think there could be a more deserted sea than this . "
" it is not quite so deserted as all that , " replied pencroft .
" what do you mean ? " asked the reporter .
" we are on it .
do you take our vessel for a wreck and us for porpoises ? "
and pencroft laughed at his joke .
in the expectation of the next day they could not but feel some emotion .
there was so much uncertainty in their enterprise !
were they near tabor island ?
was the island still inhabited by the castaway to whose succor they had come ?
who was this man ?
would not his presence disturb the little colony till then so united ?
besides , would he be content to exchange his prison for another ?
all these questions , which would no doubt be answered the next day , kept them in suspense , and at the dawn of day they all fixed their gaze on the western horizon .
" land ! " shouted pencroft at about six o'clock in the morning .
and it was impossible that pencroft should be mistaken , it was evident that land was there .
imagine the joy of the little crew of the " bonadventure . " in a few hours they would land on the beach of the island !
the low coast of tabor island , scarcely emerging from the sea , was not more than fifteen miles distant .
the head of the " bonadventure , " which was a little to the south of the island , was set directly towards it , and as the sun mounted in the east , its rays fell upon one or two headlands .
" this is a much less important isle than lincoln island , " observed herbert , " and is probably due like ours to some submarine convulsion . "
at eleven o'clock the " bonadventure " was not more than two miles off , and pencroft , while looking for a suitable place at which to land , proceeded very cautiously through the unknown waters .
the whole of the island could now be surveyed , and on it could be seen groups of gum and other large trees , of the same species as those growing on lincoln island .
but the astonishing thing was that no smoke arose to show that the island was inhabited , no signal whatever appeared on the shore !
and yet the document was clear enough ; there was a castaway , and this castaway should have been on the watch .
in the meanwhile the " bonadventure " entered the winding channels among the reefs , and pencroft observed every turn with extreme care .
gideon spilett with his glass eagerly scanned the shore , though without perceiving anything .
however , at about twelve o'clock the keel of the " bonadventure " grated on the bottom .
the anchor was let go , the sails furled , and the crew of the little vessel landed .
and there was no reason to doubt that this was tabor island , since according to the most recent charts there was no island in this part of the pacific between new zealand and the american coast .
" from the summit of that hill , " said spilett , " we can no doubt obtain a complete view of the island , which will greatly facilitate our search . "
" so as to do here , " replied herbert , " that which captain harding did the very first thing on lincoln island , by climbing mount franklin . "
" exactly so , " answered the reporter , " and it is the best plan . "
while thus talking the explorers had advanced along a clearing which terminated at the foot of the hill .
flocks of rock - pigeons and sea - swallows , similar to those of lincoln island , fluttered around them .
under the woods which skirted the glade on the left they could hear the bushes rustling and see the grass waving , which indicated the presence of timid animals , but still nothing to show that the island was inhabited .
arrived at the foot of the hill , pencroft , spilett , and herbert climbed it in a few minutes , and gazed anxiously round the horizon .
all around , the lonely sea extended to the limits of the horizon .
no land nor even a sail was in sight .
on the contrary this was a uniform mass of verdure , out of which rose two or three hills of no great height .
obliquely to the oval of the island ran a stream through a wide meadow falling into the sea on the west by a narrow mouth .
" the domain is limited , " said herbert .
" yes , " rejoined pencroft : " it would have been too small for us . "
" and moreover , " said the reporter , " it appears to be uninhabited . "
" indeed , " answered herbert , " nothing here betrays the presence of man . "
" let us go down , " said pencroft , " and search . "
the sailor and his two companions returned to the shore , to the place where they had left the " bonadventure . "
they had decided to make the tour of the island on foot , before exploring the interior ; so that not a spot should escape their investigations .
the beach was easy to follow , and only in some places was their way barred by large rocks , which , however , they easily passed round .
the explorers proceeded towards the south , disturbing numerous flocks of sea - birds and herds of seals , which threw themselves into the sea as soon as they saw the strangers at a distance .
" those beasts yonder , " observed the reporter , " do not see men for the first time .
they fear them , therefore they must know them . "
an hour after their departure they arrived on the southern point of the islet , terminated by a sharp cape , and proceeded towards the north along the western coast , equally formed by sand and rocks , the background bordered with thick woods .
there was not a trace of a habitation in any part , not the print of a human foot on the shore of the island , which after four hours ' walking had been gone completely round .
it was to say the least very extraordinary , and they were compelled to believe that tabor island was not or was no longer inhabited .
pencroft , spilett , and herbert , forming more or less probable conjectures , dined rapidly on board the " bonadventure " so as to be able to continue their excursion until nightfall .
this was done at five o'clock in the evening , at which hour they entered the wood .
numerous animals fled at their approach , being principally , one might say , only goats and pigs , which were obviously european species .
doubtless some whaler had landed them on the island , where they had rapidly increased .
herbert resolved to catch one or two living , and take them back to lincoln island .
" but , " observed gideon spilett , " this not only proves that men have landed on the island , but also that they lived on it for some time .
how many of them remain ? "
" well , if he is still on the island , " replied pencroft , " it is impossible but that we shall find him . "
the exploration was continued .
the sailor and his companions naturally followed the route which cut diagonally across the island , and they were thus obliged to follow the stream which flowed towards the sea .
if the animals of european origin , if works due to a human hand , showed incontestably that men had already visited the island , several specimens of the vegetable kingdom did not prove it less .
in some places , in the midst of clearings , it was evident that the soil had been planted with culinary plants , at probably the same distant period .
what , then , was herbert 's joy , when he recognized potatoes , chicory , sorrel , carrots , cabbages , and turnips , of which it was sufficient to collect the seed to enrich the soil of lincoln island .
" capital , jolly ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" that will suit neb as well as us .
even if we do not find the castaway , at least our voyage will not have been useless , and god will have rewarded us . "
" doubtless , " replied gideon spilett , " but to see the state in which we find these plantations , it is to be feared that the island has not been inhabited for some time . "
" indeed , " answered herbert , " an inhabitant , whoever he was , could not have neglected such an important culture ! "
" yes , " said pencroft , " the castaway has gone . " " we must suppose so . "
" it must then be admitted that the document has already a distant date ? "
" and that the bottle only arrived at lincoln island after having floated in the sea a long time . "
" let us go on board , and to - morrow we will begin again , " said the reporter .
this was the wisest course , and it was about to be followed when herbert , pointing to a confused mass among the trees , exclaimed,--
chapter 14
pencroft , herbert , and gideon spilett remained silent in the midst of the darkness .
pencroft shouted loudly . no reply was made .
the sailor then struck a light and set fire to a twig .
this lighted for a minute a small room , which appeared perfectly empty .
at the back was a rude fireplace , with a few cold cinders , supporting an armful of dry wood .
" there is no one here , " said the reporter .
" no one , " replied pencroft .
" it is a long time since this room has been inhabited , " observed herbert .
" yes , a very long time ! " answered the reporter .
" mr . spilett , " then said pencroft , " instead of returning on board , i think that it would be well to pass the night in this hut . "
" you are right , pencroft , " answered gideon spilett , " and if its owner returns , well ! perhaps he will not be sorry to find the place taken possession of . "
" he will not return , " said the sailor , shaking his head .
" you think that he has quitted the island ? " asked the reporter .
" if he had quitted the island he would have taken away his weapons and his tools , " replied pencroft .
" you know the value which castaways set on such articles as these the last remains of a wreck .
no ! no ! " repeated the sailor , in a tone of conviction ; " no , he has not left the island !
if he had escaped in a boat made by himself , he would still less have left these indispensable and necessary articles .
no ! he is on the island ! "
" living ? " asked herbert .
it was then agreed that the night should be passed in the deserted dwelling , and a store of wood found in a corner was sufficient to warm it .
the door closed , pencroft , herbert and spilett remained there , seated on a bench , talking little but wondering much .
the door might have opened suddenly , and a man presented himself to them without their being in the least surprised , notwithstanding all that the hut revealed of abandonment , and they had their hands ready to press the hands of this man , this castaway , this unknown friend , for whom friends were waiting .
but no voice was heard , the door did not open . the hours thus passed away .
how long the night appeared to the sailor and his companions !
herbert alone slept for two hours , for at his age sleep is a necessity .
they were all three anxious to continue their exploration of the day before , and to search the most secret recesses of the islet !
the inferences deduced by pencroft were perfectly reasonable , and it was nearly certain that , as the hut was deserted , and the tools , utensils , and weapons were still there , the owner had succumbed .
day dawned ; pencroft and his companions immediately proceeded to survey the dwelling .
it was probable that a disabled vessel had been cast on the coast of the island , that one at least of the crew had been saved , and that by means of the wreck this man , having tools at his disposal , had built the dwelling .
and this became still more evident when gideon spilett , after having walked around the hut , saw on a plank , probably one of those which had formed the armor of the wrecked vessel , these letters already half effaced :
br -- tan -- a " britannia , " exclaimed pencroft , whom the reporter had called ; " it is a common name for ships , and i could not say if she was english or american ! "
" it matters very little , pencroft ! "
" very little indeed , " answered the sailor , " and we will save the survivor of her crew if he is still living , to whatever country he may belong .
but before beginning our search again let us go on board the ' bonadventure ' . "
a sort of uneasiness had seized pencroft upon the subject of his vessel .
at any rate the sailor was not sorry to go to breakfast on board .
they set out on their walk , gazing into the wood and thickets through which goats and pigs fled in hundreds .
twenty minutes after leaving the hut pencroft and his companions reached the western coast of the island , and saw the " bonadventure " held fast by her anchor , which was buried deep in the sand .
pencroft could not restrain a sigh of satisfaction .
after all this vessel was his child , and it is the right of fathers to be often uneasy when there is no occasion for it .
they returned on board , breakfasted , so that it should not be necessary to dine until very late ; then the repast being ended , the exploration was continued and conducted with the most minute care .
indeed , it was very probable that the only inhabitant of the island had perished .
it was therefore more for the traces of a dead than of a living man that pencroft and his companions searched .
there was then scarcely any doubt that , if the castaway was dead , no trace of his body now remained , but that some wild beast had probably devoured it to the last bone .
" we will set off to - morrow at daybreak , " said pencroft to his two companions , as about two o'clock they were resting for a few minutes under the shade of a clump of firs .
" i should think that we might without scruple take the utensils which belonged to the castaway , " added herbert .
" i think so , too , " returned gideon spilett , " and these arms and tools will make up the stores of granite house .
the supply of powder and shot is also most important . "
" yes , " replied pencroft , " but we must not forget to capture a couple or two of those pigs , of which lincoln island is destitute . "
" nor to gather those seeds , " added herbert , " which will give us all the vegetables of the old and the new worlds . "
" then perhaps it would be best , " said the reporter , " to remain a day longer on tabor island , so as to collect all that may be useful to us . "
" no , mr . spilett , " answered pencroft , " i will ask you to set off to - morrow at daybreak .
the wind seems to me to be likely to shift to the west , and after having had a fair wind for coming we shall have a fair wind for going back . "
" then do not let us lose time , " said herbert , rising .
" we wo n't waste time , " returned pencroft .
herbert accordingly took the path which led towards the cultivated part of the islet , while the sailor and the reporter entered the forest .
" that 's herbert 's voice , " said the reporter .
" run ! " exclaimed pencroft .
and the sailor and spilett immediately ran at full speed towards the spot from whence the cries proceeded .
to rush on this monster , throw him on the ground in his turn , snatch herbert from him , then bind him securely , was the work of a minute for pencroft and gideon spilett .
the sailor was of herculean strength , the reporter also very powerful , and in spite of the monster 's resistance he was firmly tied so that he could not even move .
" you are not hurt , herbert ? " asked spilett .
" no , no ! "
" oh , if this ape had wounded him ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" but he is not an ape , " answered herbert .
at these words pencroft and gideon spilett looked at the singular being who lay on the ground .
indeed it was not an ape ; it was a human being , a man .
but what a man !
a savage in all the horrible acceptation of the word , and so much the more frightful that he seemed fallen to the lowest degree of brutishness !
shaggy hair , untrimmed beard descending to the chest , the body almost naked except a rag round the waist , wild eyes , enormous hands with immensely long nails , skin the color of mahogany , feet as hard as if made of horn , such was the miserable creature who yet had a claim to be called a man .
but it might justly be asked if there were yet a soul in this body , or if the brute instinct alone survived in it !
" are you quite sure that this is a man , or that he has ever been one ? " said pencroft to the reporter .
" alas ! there is no doubt about it , " replied spilett .
" then this must be the castaway ? " asked herbert .
" yes , " replied gideon spilett , " but the unfortunate man has no longer anything human about him ! "
the reporter spoke the truth .
it was evident that if the castaway had ever been a civilized being , solitude had made him a savage , or worse , perhaps a regular man of the woods .
hoarse sounds issued from his throat between his teeth , which were sharp as the teeth of a wild beast made to tear raw flesh .
it could be seen that he was active and powerful , but the physical qualities had been developed in him to the injury of the moral qualities .
and yet on looking into his eyes , the reporter thought he could see that all reason was not extinguished in him .
however , the prisoner did not struggle , nor even attempt to break his bonds .
was he overwhelmed by the presence of men whose fellow he had once been ?
had he found in some corner of his brain a fleeting remembrance which recalled him to humanity ?
if free , would he attempt to fly , or would he remain ?
they could not tell , but they did not make the experiment ; and after gazing attentively at the miserable creature,--
" whoever he may be , " remarked gideon spilett , " whoever he may have been , and whatever he may become , it is our duty to take him with us to lincoln island . "
" yes , yes ! " replied herbert , " and perhaps with care we may arouse in him some gleam of intelligence . "
" the soul does not die , " said the reporter , " and it would be a great satisfaction to rescue one of god 's creatures from brutishness . "
pencroft shook his head doubtfully .
" we must try at any rate , " returned the reporter ; " humanity commands us . "
it was indeed their duty as christians and civilized beings .
all three felt this , and they well knew that cyrus harding would approve of their acting thus .
" shall we leave him bound ? " asked the sailor .
" perhaps he would walk if his feet were unfastened , " said herbert .
" let us try , " replied pencroft .
the cords which shackled the prisoner 's feet were cut off , but his arms remained securely fastened .
he got up by himself and did not manifest any desire to run away .
his hard eyes darted a piercing glance at the three men , who walked near him , but nothing denoted that he recollected being their fellow , or at least having been so .
a continual hissing sound issued from his lips , his aspect was wild , but he did not attempt to resist .
by the reporter 's advice the unfortunate man was taken to the hut .
in a few minutes they arrived there , but the prisoner remembered nothing , and it appeared that he had lost consciousness of everything .
what could they think of the degree of brutishness into which this miserable being had fallen , unless that his imprisonment on the islet dated from a very distant period and after having arrived there a rational being solitude had reduced him to this condition .
the reporter then thought that perhaps the sight of fire would have some effect on him , and in a moment one of those beautiful flames , that attract even animals , blazed up on the hearth .
the sight of the flame seemed at first to fix the attention of the unhappy object , but soon he turned away and the look of intelligence faded .
evidently there was nothing to be done , for the time at least , but to take him on board the " bonadventure . " this was done , and he remained there in pencroft 's charge .
herbert and spilett returned to finish their work ; and some hours after they came back to the shore , carrying the utensils and guns , a store of vegetables , of seeds , some game , and two couple of pigs .
all was embarked , and the " bonadventure " was ready to weigh anchor and sail with the morning tide .
the prisoner had been placed in the fore - cabin , where he remained quiet , silent , apparently deaf and dumb .
pencroft offered him something to eat , but he pushed away the cooked meat that was presented to him and which doubtless did not suit him .
but on the sailor showing him one of the ducks which herbert had killed , he pounced on it like a wild beast , and devoured it greedily .
" the poor man must no doubt have been in this state for a long time , " said herbert .
" perhaps , " answered gideon spilett .
" about what age is he ? " asked the lad .
" it is difficult to say , " replied the reporter , " for it is impossible to see his features under the thick beard which covers his face , but he is no longer young , and i suppose he might be about fifty . "
" have you noticed , mr . spilett , how deeply sunk his eyes are ? " asked herbert .
" yes , herbert , but i must add that they are more human than one could expect from his appearance . "
" however , we shall see , " replied pencroft , " and i am anxious to know what opinion captain harding will have of our savage .
we went to look for a human creature , and we are bringing back a monster !
after all , we did what we could . "
the night passed , and whether the prisoner slept or not could not be known , but at any rate , although he had been unbound , he did not move .
he was like a wild animal , which appears stunned at first by its capture , and becomes wild again afterwards .
at five o'clock in the morning the anchor was weighed .
pencroft took a reef in the mainsail , and steered towards the north - east , so as to sail straight for lincoln island .
the first day of the voyage was not marked by any incident .
the prisoner remained quiet in the fore - cabin , and as he had been a sailor it appeared that the motion of the vessel might produce on him a salutary reaction .
did some recollection of his former calling return to him ?
however that might be , he remained tranquil , astonished rather than depressed .
pencroft was soon obliged to sail close - hauled , and without saying anything about it he began to be uneasy at the state of the sea , which frequently broke over the bows .
certainly , if the wind did not moderate , it would take a longer time to reach lincoln island than it had taken to make tabor island .
indeed , on the morning of the 17th , the " bonadventure " had been forty - eight hours at sea , and nothing showed that she was near the island .
it was impossible , besides , to estimate the distance traversed , or to trust to the reckoning for the direction , as the speed had been very irregular .
twenty - four hours after there was yet no land in sight .
the wind was right ahead and the sea very heavy .
on the 18th , a wave swept completely over the " bonadventure " ; and if the crew had not taken the precaution of lashing themselves to the deck , they would have been carried away .
pencroft , gideon spilett , and herbert , greatly astonished , let him proceed .
neither pencroft , spilett , nor herbert thought of taking an hour 's sleep .
they kept a sharp look - out , for either lincoln island could not be far distant and would be sighted at daybreak , or the " bonadventure , " carried away by currents , had drifted so much that it would be impossible to rectify her course .
pencroft , uneasy to the last degree , yet did not despair , for he had a gallant heart , and grasping the tiller he anxiously endeavored to pierce the darkness which surrounded them .
about two o'clock in the morning he started forward,--
" a light ! a light ! " he shouted .
indeed , a bright light appeared twenty miles to the northeast .
pencroft , who was bearing too much to the north , altered his course and steered towards the fire , which burned brightly above the horizon like a star of the first magnitude .
chapter 15
the next day , the 20th of october , at seven o'clock in the morning , after a voyage of four days , the " bonadventure " gently glided up to the beach at the mouth of the mercy .
" god be praised ! there they are ! " exclaimed cyrus harding .
as to neb in his joy , he began to dance , to twirl round , clapping his hands and shouting , " oh ! my master ! "
a more touching pantomime than the finest discourse .
the engineer 's first idea , on counting the people on the deck of the " bonadventure , " was that pencroft had not found the castaway of tabor island , or at any rate that the unfortunate man had refused to leave his island and change one prison for another .
did you meet with any accident ? "
" no , " replied gideon spilett ; " on the contrary , everything went wonderfully well .
we will tell you all about it . "
" however , " returned the engineer , " your search has been unsuccessful , since you are only three , just as you went ! "
" excuse me , captain , " replied the sailor , " we are four . "
" you have found the castaway ? "
" yes . "
" and you have brought him ? "
" yes . "
" living ? "
" yes . "
" where is he ?
who is he ? "
" he is , " replied the reporter , " or rather he was a man !
there , cyrus , that is all we can tell you ! "
the engineer was then informed of all that had passed during the voyage , and under what conditions the search had been conducted ; how the only dwelling in the island had long been abandoned ; how at last a castaway had been captured , who appeared no longer to belong to the human species .
" and that 's just the point , " added pencroft , " i do n't know if we have done right to bring him here . "
" certainly you have , pencroft , " replied the engineer quickly .
" but the wretched creature has no sense ! "
" that is possible at present , " replied cyrus harding , " but only a few months ago the wretched creature was a man like you and me .
and who knows what will become of the survivor of us after a long solitude on this island ?
it is a great misfortune to be alone , my friends ; and it must be believed that solitude can quickly destroy reason , since you have found this poor creature in such a state ! "
" but , captain , " asked herbert , " what leads you to think that the brutishness of the unfortunate man began only a few months back ? "
" because the document we found had been recently written , " answered the engineer , " and the castaway alone can have written it . "
" always supposing , " observed gideon spilett , " that it had not been written by a companion of this man , since dead . "
" that is impossible , my dear spilett . "
" why so ? " asked the reporter .
" because the document would then have spoken of two castaways , " replied harding , " and it mentioned only one . "
herbert then in a few words related the incidents of the voyage , and dwelt on the curious fact of the sort of passing gleam in the prisoner 's mind , when for an instant in the height of the storm he had become a sailor .
" well , herbert , " replied the engineer , " you are right to attach great importance to this fact .
the unfortunate man can not be incurable , and despair has made him what he is ; but here he will find his fellow - men , and since there is still a soul in him , this soul we shall save ! "
but cyrus harding approaching , placed his hand on his shoulder with a gesture full of authority , and looked at him with infinite tenderness .
immediately the unhappy man , submitting to a superior will , gradually became calm , his eyes fell , his head bent , and he made no more resistance .
" poor fellow ! " murmured the engineer .
cyrus harding had attentively observed him .
to judge by his appearance this miserable being had no longer anything human about him , and yet harding , as had the reporter already , observed in his look an indefinable trace of intelligence .
it was decided that the castaway , or rather the stranger as he was thenceforth termed by his companions , should live in one of the rooms of granite house , from which , however , he could not escape .
he was led there without difficulty , and with careful attention , it might , perhaps , be hoped that some day he would be a companion to the settlers in lincoln island .
cyrus harding , during breakfast , which neb had hastened to prepare , as the reporter , herbert , and pencroft were dying of hunger , heard in detail all the incidents which had marked the voyage of exploration to the islet .
he agreed with his friends on this point , that the stranger must be either english or american , the name britannia leading them to suppose this , and , besides , through the bushy beard , and under the shaggy , matted hair , the engineer thought he could recognize the characteristic features of the anglo - saxon .
" but , by the bye , " said gideon spilett , addressing herbert , " you never told us how you met this savage , and we know nothing , except that you would have been strangled , if we had not happened to come up in time to help you ! "
" upon my word , " answered herbert , " it is rather difficult to say how it happened .
" you hope , then , cyrus , to succeed in reforming the man ? " asked the reporter .
" yes , " replied the engineer .
breakfast over , harding and his companions left granite house and returned to the beach .
they there occupied themselves in unloading the " bonadventure , " and the engineer , having examined the arms and tools , saw nothing which could help them to establish the identity of the stranger .
the two barrels , containing the powder and shot , as well as the box of caps , were very welcome .
however , the use of pyroxyle was to be continued , for this substance giving excellent results , there was no reason for substituting ordinary powder .
when the unloading of the vessel was finished,--
" captain , " said pencroft , " i think it would be prudent to put our ' bonadventure ' in a safe place . "
" is she not safe at the mouth of the mercy ? " asked cyrus harding .
she is a famous craft , you see , and she behaved admirably during the squall which struck us on our return . "
" could she not float in the river ? "
" no doubt , captain , she could ; but there is no shelter there , and in the east winds , i think that the ' bonadventure ' would suffer much from the surf . "
" well , where would you put her , pencroft ? "
" in port balloon , " replied the sailor .
" that little creek , shut in by rocks , seems to me to be just the harbor we want . "
" is it not rather far ? "
" pooh ! it is not more than three miles from granite house , and we have a fine straight road to take us there ! "
" do it then , pencroft , and take your ' bonadventure ' there , " replied the engineer , " and yet i would rather have her under our more immediate protection .
when we have time , we must make a little harbor for her . "
" famous ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" a harbor with a lighthouse , a pier , and dock !
ah ! really with you , captain , everything becomes easy . "
" yes , my brave pencroft , " answered the engineer , " but on condition , however , that you help me , for you do as much as three men in all our work . "
herbert and the sailor then re - embarked on board the " bonadventure , " the anchor was weighed , the sail hoisted , and the wind drove her rapidly towards claw cape .
two hours after , she was reposing on the tranquil waters of port balloon .
during the first days passed by the stranger in granite house , had he already given them reason to think that his savage nature was becoming tamed ?
did a brighter light burn in the depths of that obscured mind ?
in short , was the soul returning to the body ?
yes , to a certainty , and to such a degree , that cyrus harding and the reporter wondered if the reason of the unfortunate man had ever been totally extinguished .
they had reason to hope , and to hope much .
cyrus harding had profited by a moment when he was sleeping , to cut his hair and matted beard , which formed a sort of mane and gave him such a savage aspect .
he had also been clothed more suitably , after having got rid of the rag which covered him .
the result was that , thanks to these attentions , the stranger resumed a more human appearance , and it even seemed as if his eyes had become milder .
certainly , when formerly lighted up by intelligence , this man 's face must have had a sort of beauty .
every day , harding imposed on himself the task of passing some hours in his company .
he came and worked near him , and occupied himself in different things , so as to fix his attention .
a spark , indeed , would be sufficient to reillumine that soul , a recollection crossing that brain to recall reason .
that had been seen , during the storm , on board the " bonadventure ! "
the engineer did not neglect either to speak aloud , so as to penetrate at the same time by the organs of hearing and sight the depths of that torpid intelligence .
sometimes one of his companions , sometimes another , sometimes all joined him .
they spoke most often of things belonging to the navy , which must interest a sailor .
at times , the stranger gave some slight attention to what was said , and the settlers were soon convinced that he partly understood them .
sometimes the expression of his countenance was deeply sorrowful , a proof that he suffered mentally , for his face could not be mistaken ; but he did not speak , although at different times , however , they almost thought that words were about to issue from his lips .
at all events , the poor creature was quite quiet and sad !
was not his sadness only the result of his seclusion ?
nothing could yet be ascertained .
how he was on the watch for his soul , if one may use the expression !
how he was ready to grasp it !
the settlers followed with real sympathy all the phases of the cure undertaken by harding .
cyrus harding resolved then to try him , by transporting him to another scene , from that ocean which formerly his eyes had been accustomed to contemplate , to the border of the forest , which might perhaps recall those where so many years of his life had been passed !
" but , " said gideon spilett , " can we hope that he will not escape , if once set at liberty ? "
" i do not think so , " returned harding .
" let us try , " said spilett .
" we will try , " replied the engineer .
this was on the 30th of october , and consequently the castaway of tabor island had been a prisoner in granite house for nine days .
it was warm , and a bright sun darted its rays on the island .
cyrus harding and pencroft went to the room occupied by the stranger , who was found lying near the window and gazing at the sky .
" come , my friend , " said the engineer to him .
arrived at the door , harding and pencroft made him take his place in the lift , while neb , herbert , and gideon spilett waited for them before granite house .
the lift descended , and in a few moments all were united on the beach .
the settlers went a short distance from the stranger , so as to leave him at liberty .
he then made a few steps toward the sea , and his look brightened with extreme animation , but he did not make the slightest attempt to escape .
he was gazing at the little waves which , broken by the islet , rippled on the sand .
" this is only the sea , " observed gideon spilett , " and possibly it does not inspire him with any wish to escape ! "
" yes , " replied harding , " we must take him to the plateau , on the border of the forest .
there the experiment will be more conclusive . "
" we shall soon see , " harding contented himself with replying , his eyes not quitting those of his patient .
the latter was then led towards the mouth of the mercy , and all climbing the left bank of the river , reached prospect heights .
arrived at the spot on which grew the first beautiful trees of the forest , their foliage slightly agitated by the breeze , the stranger appeared greedily to drink in the penetrating odor which filled the atmosphere , and a long sigh escaped from his chest .
the settlers kept behind him , ready to seize him if he made any movement to escape !
and , indeed , the poor creature was on the point of springing into the creek which separated him from the forest , and his legs were bent for an instant as if for a spring , but almost immediately he stepped back , half sank down , and a large tear fell from his eyes .
" ah ! " exclaimed cyrus harding , " you have become a man again , for you can weep ! "
chapter 16
yes ! the unfortunate man had wept !
some recollection doubtless had flashed across his brain , and to use cyrus harding 's expression , by those tears he was once more a man .
the colonists left him for some time on the plateau , and withdrew themselves to a short distance , so that he might feel himself free ; but he did not think of profiting by this liberty , and harding soon brought him back to granite house .
two days after this occurrence , the stranger appeared to wish gradually to mingle with their common life .
he evidently heard and understood , but no less evidently was he strangely determined not to speak to the colonists ; for one evening , pencroft , listening at the door of his room , heard these words escape from his lips:--
" no ! here !
i ! never ! "
the sailor reported these words to his companions .
" there is some painful mystery there ! " said harding .
the stranger had begun to use the laboring tools , and he worked in the garden .
when he stopped in his work , as was often the case , he remained retired within himself , but on the engineer 's recommendation , they respected the reserve which he apparently wished to keep .
if one of the settlers approached him , he drew back , and his chest heaved with sobs , as if overburdened !
was it remorse that overwhelmed him thus ?
they were compelled to believe so , and gideon spilett could not help one day making this observation,--
" if he does not speak it is because he has , i fear , things too serious to be told ! "
they must be patient and wait .
a sort of irresistible pity led him towards the unfortunate man , and he touched his arm lightly .
" my friend ! " said he .
the stranger tried to avoid his look , and cyrus harding having endeavored to take his hand , he drew back quickly .
" my friend , " said harding in a firmer voice , " look at me , i wish it ! "
the stranger looked at the engineer , and seemed to be under his power , as a subject under the influence of a mesmerist .
words struggled to escape from his lips .
at last he folded his arms ; then , in a hollow voice,--"who are you ? " he asked cyrus harding .
" castaways , like you , " replied the engineer , whose emotion was deep .
" we have brought you here , among your fellow - men . "
" my fellow - men ! ....
i have none ! "
" you are in the midst of friends . "
" friends!--for me ! friends ! " exclaimed the stranger , hiding his face in his hands .
" no -- never -- leave me ! leave me ! "
then he rushed to the side of the plateau which overlooked the sea , and remained there a long time motionless .
harding rejoined his companions and related to them what had just happened .
" yes ! there is some mystery in that man 's life , " said gideon spilett , " and it appears as if he had only re - entered society by the path of remorse . "
" i do n't know what sort of a man we have brought here , " said the sailor .
" he has secrets-- "
" which we will respect , " interrupted cyrus harding quickly .
" if he has committed any crime , he has most fearfully expiated it , and in our eyes he is absolved . "
for two hours the stranger remained alone on the shore , evidently under the influence of recollections which recalled all his past life -- a melancholy life doubtless -- and the colonists , without losing sight of him , did not attempt to disturb his solitude .
however , after two hours , appearing to have formed a resolution , he came to find cyrus harding .
his eyes were red with the tears he had shed , but he wept no longer .
his countenance expressed deep humility .
he appeared anxious , timorous , ashamed , and his eyes were constantly fixed on the ground .
" sir , " said he to harding , " your companions and you , are you english ? "
" no , " answered the engineer , " we are americans . "
" ah ! " said the stranger , and he murmured , " i prefer that ! "
" and you , my friend ? " asked the engineer .
" english , " replied he hastily .
and as if these few words had been difficult to say , he retreated to the beach , where he walked up and down between the cascade and the mouth of the mercy , in a state of extreme agitation .
then , passing one moment close to herbert , he stopped and in a stifled voice,--
" what month ? " he asked .
" december , " replied herbert .
" what year ? "
" 1866 . "
" twelve years ! twelve years ! " he exclaimed .
then he left him abruptly .
herbert reported to the colonists the questions and answers which had been made .
" this unfortunate man , " observed gideon spilett , " was no longer acquainted with either months or years ! "
" yes ! " added herbert , " and he had been twelve years already on the islet when we found him there ! "
" twelve years ! " rejoined harding .
" ah ! twelve years of solitude , after a wicked life , perhaps , may well impair a man 's reason ! "
" i am induced to think , " said pencroft , " that this man was not wrecked on tabor island , but that in consequence of some crime he was left there . "
" you must be right , pencroft , " replied the reporter , " and if it is so it is not impossible that those who left him on the island may return to fetch him some day ! "
" and they will no longer find him , " said herbert .
" but then , " added pencroft , " they must return , and-- "
" my friends , " said cyrus harding , " do not let us discuss this question until we know more about it .
i believe that the unhappy man has suffered , that he has severely expiated his faults , whatever they may have been , and that the wish to unburden himself stifles him .
he will tell it to us doubtless , and when we know it , we shall see what course it will be best to follow .
he alone besides can tell us , if he has more than a hope , a certainty , of returning some day to his country , but i doubt it ! "
" and why ? " asked the reporter .
" but , " observed the sailor , " there is one thing which i can not explain . "
" what is it ? "
" if this man had been left for twelve years on tabor island , one may well suppose that he had been several years already in the wild state in which we found him ! "
" that is probable , " replied cyrus harding .
" it must then be many years since he wrote that document ! "
" no doubt , " and yet the document appears to have been recently written !
" besides , how do you know that the bottle which enclosed the document may not have taken several years to come from tabor island to lincoln island ? "
" that is not absolutely impossible , " replied the reporter .
" might it not have been a long time already on the coast of the island ? "
" no , " answered pencroft , " for it was still floating .
" that is true , " rejoined cyrus harding thoughtfully .
the sailor 's reasoning was very just , and pointed out an incomprehensible fact , for the document appeared to have been recently written , when the colonists found it in the bottle .
moreover , it gave the latitude and longitude of tabor island correctly , which implied that its author had a more complete knowledge of hydrography than could be expected of a common sailor .
" there is in this , again , something unaccountable , " said the engineer , " but we will not urge our companion to speak .
when he likes , my friends , then we shall be ready to hear him ! "
during the following days the stranger did not speak a word , and did not once leave the precincts of the plateau .
he worked away , without losing a moment , without taking a minute 's rest , but always in a retired place .
at meal times he never came to granite house , although invited several times to do so , but contented himself with eating a few raw vegetables .
at nightfall he did not return to the room assigned to him , but remained under some clump of trees , or when the weather was bad crouched in some cleft of the rocks .
thus he lived in the same manner as when he had no other shelter than the forests of tabor island , and as all persuasion to induce him to improve his life was in vain , the colonists waited patiently .
and the time was near , when , as it seemed , almost involuntarily urged by his conscience , a terrible confession escaped him .
on the 10th of november , about eight o'clock in the evening , as night was coming on , the stranger appeared unexpectedly before the settlers , who were assembled under the veranda .
his eyes burned strangely , and he had quite resumed the wild aspect of his worst days .
cyrus harding and his companions were astounded on seeing that , overcome by some terrible emotion , his teeth chattered like those of a person in a fever .
what was the matter with him ?
was the sight of his fellow - creatures insupportable to him ?
was he weary of this return to a civilized mode of existence ?
was he pining for his former savage life ?
it appeared so , as soon he was heard to express himself in these incoherent sentences:-- " why am i here ? ....
the colonists listened without interrupting the miserable creature , from whom these broken confessions escaped , as it were , in spite of himself .
harding wishing to calm him , approached him , but he hastily drew back .
" no ! no ! " he exclaimed ; " one word only -- am i free ? "
" you are free , " answered the engineer .
" farewell , then ! " he cried , and fled like a madman .
neb , pencroft , and herbert ran also towards the edge of the wood -- but they returned alone .
" we must let him alone ! " said cyrus harding .
" he will never come back ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" he will come back , " replied the engineer .
many days passed ; but harding -- was it a sort of presentiment?--persisted in the fixed idea that sooner or later the unhappy man would return .
" it is the last revolt of his wild nature , " said he , " which remorse has touched , and which renewed solitude will terrify . "
in the meanwhile , works of all sorts were continued , as well on prospect heights as at the corral , where harding intended to build a farm .
it is unnecessary to say that the seeds collected by herbert on tabor island had been carefully sown .
the plateau thus formed one immense kitchen - garden , well laid out and carefully tended , so that the arms of the settlers were never in want of work .
there was always something to be done .
as the esculents increased in number , it became necessary to enlarge the simple beds , which threatened to grow into regular fields and replace the meadows .
but grass abounded in other parts of the island , and there was no fear of the onagers being obliged to go on short allowance .
it was well worth while , besides , to turn prospect heights into a kitchen - garden , defended by its deep belt of creeks , and to remove them to the meadows , which had no need of protection against the depredations of quadrumana and quadrapeds .
on the 15th of november , the third harvest was gathered in .
how wonderfully had the field increased in extent , since eighteen months ago , when the first grain of wheat was sown !
the second crop of six hundred thousand grains produced this time four thousand bushels , or five hundred millions of grains !
the colony was rich in corn , for ten bushels alone were sufficient for sowing every year to produce an ample crop for the food both of men and beasts .
the harvest was completed , and the last fortnight of the month of november was devoted to the work of converting it into food for man .
in fact , they had corn , but not flour , and the establishment of a mill was necessary .
the building of this presented no more difficulty than the building of the former , and it was moreover certain that there would be no want of wind on the plateau , exposed as it was to the sea breezes .
" not to mention , " said pencroft , " that the windmill will be more lively and will have a good effect in the landscape ! "
they set to work by choosing timber for the frame and machinery of the mill .
some large stones , found at the north of the lake , could be easily transformed into millstones , and as to the sails , the inexhaustible case of the balloon furnished the necessary material .
cyrus harding made his model , and the site of the mill was chosen a little to the right of the poultry - yard , near the shore of the lake .
the frame was to rest on a pivot supported with strong timbers , so that it could turn with all the machinery it contained according as the wind required it .
the work advanced rapidly .
neb and pencroft had become very skilful carpenters , and had nothing to do but to copy the models provided by the engineer .
soon a sort of cylindrical box , in shape like a pepper - pot , with a pointed roof , rose on the spot chosen .
the four frames which formed the sails had been firmly fixed in the center beam , so as to form a certain angle with it , and secured with iron clamps .
the tools were good , and the work not difficult , for in reality , the machinery of a mill is very simple .
this was only a question of time .
every one had worked at the construction of the mill , and on the 1st of december it was finished .
as usual , pencroft was delighted with his work , and had no doubt that the apparatus was perfect .
" now for a good wind , " said he , " and we shall grind our first harvest splendidly ! "
" a good wind , certainly , " answered the engineer , " but not too much , pencroft . "
" pooh ! our mill would only go the faster ! "
" there is no need for it to go so very fast , " replied cyrus harding .
" it is known by experience that the greatest quantity of work is performed by a mill when the number of turns made by the sails in a minute is six times the number of feet traversed by the wind in a second .
a moderate breeze , which passes over twenty - four feet to the second , will give sixteen turns to the sails during a minute , and there is no need of more . "
" exactly ! " cried herbert , " a fine breeze is blowing from the northeast , which will soon do our business for us . "
in the meanwhile , the stranger had not reappeared .
several times gideon spilett and herbert searched the forest in the neighborhood of granite house , without meeting or finding any trace of him .
certainly , the former savage of tabor island could not be perplexed how to live in the forest , abounding in game , but was it not to be feared that he had resumed his habits , and that this freedom would revive in him his wild instincts ?
however , harding , by a sort of presentiment , doubtless , always persisted in saying that the fugitive would return .
" yes , he will return ! " he repeated with a confidence which his companions could not share .
the event justified cyrus harding 's predictions .
on the 3rd of december , herbert had left the plateau to go and fish on the southern bank of the lake .
he was unarmed , and till then had never taken any precautions for defense , as dangerous animals had not shown themselves on that part of the island .
meanwhile , pencroft and neb were working in the poultry - yard , while harding and the reporter were occupied at the chimneys in making soda , the store of soap being exhausted .
suddenly cries resounded,--
" help ! help ! "
herbert was there face to face with a fierce jaguar , similar to the one which had been killed on reptile end .
the struggle was short .
the stranger possessed immense strength and activity .
he seized the jaguar 's throat with one powerful hand , holding it as in a vise , without heeding the beast 's claws which tore his flesh , and with the other he plunged his knife into its heart .
the jaguar fell .
the stranger kicked away the body , and was about to fly at the moment when the settlers arrived on the field of battle , but herbert , clinging to him , cried,--
" no , no ! you shall not go ! "
harding advanced towards the stranger , who frowned when he saw him approaching .
the blood flowed from his shoulder under his torn shirt , but he took no notice of it .
" my friend , " said cyrus harding , " we have just contracted a debt of gratitude to you .
to save our boy you have risked your life ! "
" my life ! " murmured the stranger .
" what is that worth ?
less than nothing ! "
" you are wounded ? "
" it is no matter . "
" will you give me your hand ? "
and as herbert endeavored to seize the hand which had just saved him , the stranger folded his arms , his chest heaved , his look darkened , and he appeared to wish to escape , but making a violent effort over himself , and in an abrupt tone,--
" who are you ? " he asked , " and what do you claim to be to me ? "
it was the colonists ' history which he thus demanded , and for the first time .
perhaps this history recounted , he would tell his own .
in a few words harding related all that had happened since their departure from richmond ; how they had managed , and what resources they now had at their disposal .
the stranger listened with extreme attention .
then the engineer told who they all were , gideon spilett , herbert , pencroft , neb , himself , and , he added , that the greatest happiness they had felt since their arrival in lincoln island was on the return of the vessel from tabor island , when they had been able to include among them a new companion .
at these words the stranger 's face flushed , his head sunk on his breast , and confusion was depicted on his countenance .
" and now that you know us , " added cyrus harding , " will you give us your hand ? "
" no , " replied the stranger in a hoarse voice ; " no !
you are honest men !
chapter 17
these last words justified the colonists ' presentiment .
there had been some mournful past , perhaps expiated in the sight of men , but from which his conscience had not yet absolved him .
at any rate the guilty man felt remorse , he repented , and his new friends would have cordially pressed the hand which they sought ; but he did not feel himself worthy to extend it to honest men !
however , after the scene with the jaguar , he did not return to the forest , and from that day did not go beyond the enclosure of granite house .
what was the mystery of his life ?
would the stranger one day speak of it ?
time alone could show .
at any rate , it was agreed that his secret should never be asked from him , and that they would live with him as if they suspected nothing .
for some days their life continued as before .
cyrus harding and gideon spilett worked together , sometimes chemists , sometimes experimentalists .
as to neb and pencroft , one day at the stables and poultry - yard , another at the corral , without reckoning work in granite house , they were never in want of employment .
" but then , " observed pencroft , " why did he entreat the help of his fellow - creatures ?
why did he throw that paper into the sea ? "
" he will tell us why , " invariably replied cyrus harding .
" when ? "
" perhaps sooner than you think , pencroft . "
and , indeed , the day of confession was near .
on the 10th of december , a week after his return to granite house , harding saw the stranger approaching , who , in a calm voice and humble tone , said to him : " sir , i have a request to make of you . "
" speak , " answered the engineer , " but first let me ask you a question . "
at these words the stranger reddened , and was on the point of withdrawing .
harding held him back .
" comrade , " said he , " we are not only your companions but your friends .
i wish you to believe that , and now i will listen to you . "
the stranger pressed his hand over his eyes .
he was seized with a sort of trembling , and remained a few moments without being able to articulate a word .
" sir , " said he at last , " i have come to beg you to grant me a favor . "
" what is it ? "
" you have , four or five miles from here , a corral for your domesticated animals .
these animals need to be taken care of .
cyrus harding gazed at the unfortunate man for a few moments with a feeling of deep commiseration ; then,--
" my friend , " said he , " the corral has only stables hardly fit for animals . "
you wish to live at the corral , so be it .
but since you wish to live at the corral we will make the necessary arrangements for your being comfortably established there . "
" never mind that , i shall do very well . "
" my friend , " answered harding , who always intentionally made use of this cordial appellation , " you must let us judge what it will be best to do in this respect . "
" thank you , sir , " replied the stranger as he withdrew .
that very day the colonists repaired to the corral with the necessary tools , and a week had not passed before the house was ready to receive its tenant .
it was built about twenty feet from the sheds , and from there it was easy to overlook the flock of sheep , which then numbered more than eighty .
some furniture , a bed , table , bench , cupboard , and chest were manufactured , and a gun , ammunition , and tools were carried to the corral .
the stranger , however , had seen nothing of his new dwelling , and he had allowed the settlers to work there without him , while he occupied himself on the plateau , wishing , doubtless , to put the finishing stroke to his work .
indeed , thanks to him , all the ground was dug up and ready to be sowed when the time came .
it was on the 20th of december that all the arrangements at the corral were completed .
the engineer announced to the stranger that his dwelling was ready to receive him , and the latter replied that he would go and sleep there that very evening .
" gentlemen , " said he , " before i leave you , it is right that you should know my history .
i will tell it you . "
these simple words profoundly impressed cyrus harding and his companions .
the engineer rose .
" we ask you nothing , my friend , " said he ; " it is your right to be silent . "
" it is my duty to speak . "
" sit down , then . "
" no , i will stand . "
" we are ready to hear you , " replied harding .
the stranger remained standing in a corner of the room , a little in the shade .
he was bareheaded , his arms folded across his chest , and it was in this posture that in a hoarse voice , speaking like some one who obliges himself to speak , he gave the following recital , which his auditors did not once interrupt:--
the ' duncan ' was commanded by captain john mangles , and manned by a crew of fifteen men .
" this is the reason the yacht at this time lay off the coast of australia .
six months before , a bottle , enclosing a document written in english , german , and french , had been found in the irish sea , and picked up by the ' duncan . '
this document stated in substance that there still existed three survivors from the wreck of the ' britannia , ' that these survivors were captain grant and two of his men , and that they had found refuge on some land , of which the document gave the latitude , but of which the longitude , effaced by the sea , was no longer legible .
" this latitude was 37deg 11 ' south ; therefore , the longitude being unknown , if they followed the thirty - seventh parallel over continents and seas , they would be certain to reach the spot inhabited by captain grant and his two companions .
the english admiralty having hesitated to undertake this search , lord glenarvan resolved to attempt everything to find the captain .
he communicated with mary and robert grant , who joined him .
the ' duncan ' yacht was equipped for the distant voyage , in which the nobleman 's family and the captain 's children wished to take part , and the ' duncan , ' leaving glasgow , proceeded towards the atlantic , passed through the straits of magellan , and ascended the pacific as far as patagonia , where , according to a previous interpretation of the document , they supposed that captain grant was a prisoner among the indians .
" the ' duncan ' disembarked her passengers on the western coast of patagonia , and sailed to pick them up again on the eastern coast at cape corrientes .
lord glenarvan traversed patagonia , following the thirty - seventh parallel , and having found no trace of the captain , he re - embarked on the 13th of november , so as to pursue his search through the ocean .
" after having unsuccessfully visited the islands of tristan d'acunha and amsterdam , situated in her course , the ' duncan , ' as i have said , arrived at cape bernouilli , on the australian coast , on the 20th of december , 1854 .
" it was lord glenarvan 's intention to traverse australia as he had traversed america , and he disembarked .
a few miles from the coast was established a farm , belonging to an irishman , who offered hospitality to the travelers .
lord glenarvan made known to the irishman the cause which had brought him to these parts , and asked if he knew whether a three - masted english vessel , the ' britannia , ' had been lost less than two years before on the west coast of australia .
" the irishman had never heard of this wreck , but , to the great surprise of the bystanders , one of his servants came forward and said,--
" ' my lord , praise and thank god !
if captain grant is still living , he is living on the australian shores . '
" ' who are you ? ' asked lord glenarvan .
" ' a scotchman like yourself , my lord , ' replied the man ; ' i am one of captain grant 's crew -- one of the castaways of the " britannia . ' "
" this man was called ayrton .
" this man spoke in a frank voice and with a confident look ; his words could not be doubted .
the irishman , in whose service he had been for more than a year , answered for his trustworthiness .
lord glenarvan , therefore , believed in the fidelity of this man and , by his advice , resolved to cross australia , following the thirty - seventh parallel .
lord glenarvan , his wife , the two children , the major , the frenchman , captain mangles , and a few sailors composed the little band under the command of ayrton , while the ' duncan , ' under charge of the mate , tom austin , proceeded to melbourne , there to await lord glenarvan 's instructions .
" they set out on the 23rd of december , 1854 .
" it is time to say that ayrton was a traitor .
he was , indeed , the boatswain 's mate of the ' britannia , ' but , after some dispute with his captain , he endeavored to incite the crew to mutiny and seize the ship , and captain grant had landed him , on the 8th of april , 1852 , on the west coast of australia , and then sailed , leaving him there , as was only just .
" therefore this wretched man knew nothing of the wreck of the ' britannia ' ; he had just heard of it from glenarvan 's account .
" meanwhile , the ' duncan ' had been sent to melbourne for repairs .
it was necessary , then , to get lord glenarvan to order her to leave melbourne and go to the east coast of australia , where it would be easy to seize her .
" so far the villain had succeeded in his wicked design .
he would be able to take the ' duncan ' into twofold bay , where it would be easy for the convicts to seize her , and her crew massacred , ben joyce would become master of the seas .
but it pleased god to prevent the accomplishment of these terrible projects .
he wished to stop him , but austin showed him the letter ! ...
and indeed , by a providential error of the french geographer , who had written the letter , the east coast of new zealand was mentioned as the place of destination .
" the ' duncan ' cruised about on this coast until the 3rd of march .
" this is what had happened .
" after a thousand hardships , a thousand dangers , lord glenarvan had accomplished his journey , and arrived on the east coast of australia , at twofold bay .
" lord glenarvan could only arrive at one conclusion ; that his honest yacht had fallen into the hands of ben joyce , and had become a pirate vessel !
" however , lord glenarvan would not give up .
" this was on the 3rd of march , 1855 .
lord glenarvan was now on board the ' duncan , ' but ayrton was there also .
he appeared before the nobleman , who wished to extract from him all that the villain knew about captain grant .
lord glenarvan then told him , that at the first port they put into , he would be delivered up to the english authorities .
" ayrton then related all his life , and it was certain that he knew nothing from the day on which captain grant had landed him on the australian coast .
" nevertheless , lord glenarvan kept the promise which he had given .
" the convict , then , went to take their place on this desert islet , and at the moment he left the yacht these words were pronounced by lord glenarvan:-- " ' here , ayrton , you will be far from any land , and without any possible communication with your fellow - creatures .
i will never forget it !
" and the ' duncan , ' making sail , soon disappeared .
this was 18th of march , 1855 .
" gentlemen , he repented , he was ashamed of his crimes and was very miserable !
he said to himself , that if men came some day to take him from that islet , he must be worthy to return among them !
how he suffered , that wretched man !
how he labored to recover himself by work !
how he prayed to be reformed by prayer !
for two years , three years , this went on , but ayrton , humbled by solitude , always looking for some ship to appear on the horizon , asking himself if the time of expiation would soon be complete , suffered as none other suffered !
oh ! how dreadful was this solitude , to a heart tormented by remorse !
" but doubtless heaven had not sufficiently punished this unhappy man , for he felt that he was gradually becoming a savage !
he felt that brutishness was gradually gaining on him !
" he could not say if it was after two or three years of solitude , but at last he became the miserable creature you found !
" i have no need to tell you , gentlemen , that ayrton , ben joyce , and i , are the same . "
ayrton , you are forgiven !
ayrton drew back .
" here is my hand ! " said the engineer .
ayrton grasped the hand which harding extended to him , and great tears fell from his eyes .
" will you live with us ? " asked cyrus harding .
" captain harding , leave me some time longer , " replied ayrton , " leave me alone in the hut in the corral ! "
" as you like , ayrton , " answered cyrus harding .
ayrton was going to withdraw , when the engineer addressed one more question to him:--
" one word more , my friend .
since it was your intention to live alone , why did you throw into the sea the document which put us on your track ? "
" a document ? " repeated ayrton , who did not appear to know what he meant .
" yes , the document which we found enclosed in a bottle , giving us the exact position of tabor island ! "
ayrton passed his hand over his brow , then after having thought , " i never threw any document into the sea ! " he answered .
" never ? " exclaimed pencroft .
" never ! "
and ayrton , bowing , reached the door and departed .
chapter 18
" poor man ! " said herbert , who had rushed to the door , but returned , having seen ayrton slide down the rope on the lift and disappear in the darkness .
" he will come back , " said cyrus harding .
who was it then ? "
certainly , if ever a question was necessary to be made , it was that one !
" it was he , " answered neb , " only the unhappy man was half - mad . "
" yes ! " said herbert , " and he was no longer conscious of what he was doing . "
" it can only be explained in that way , my friends , " replied harding quickly , " and i understand now how ayrton was able to point out exactly the situation of tabor island , since the events which had preceded his being left on the island had made it known to him . "
" however , " observed pencroft , " if he was not yet a brute when he wrote that document , and if he threw it into the sea seven or eight years ago , how is it that the paper has not been injured by damp ? "
" that proves , " answered cyrus harding , " that ayrton was deprived of intelligence at a more recent time than he thinks . "
" of course it must be so , " replied pencroft , " without that the fact would be unaccountable . "
" unaccountable indeed , " answered the engineer , who did not appear desirous to prolong the conversation .
" but has ayrton told the truth ? " asked the sailor .
i remember quite well the account in the newspapers of the yacht expedition undertaken by lord glenarvan , and its result . "
the next day -- the 21st of december -- the colonists descended to the beach , and having climbed the plateau they found nothing of ayrton .
he had reached his house in the corral during the night and the settlers judged it best not to agitate him by their presence .
time would doubtless perform what sympathy had been unable to accomplish .
herbert , pencroft , and neb resumed their ordinary occupations .
on this day the same work brought harding and the reporter to the workshop at the chimneys .
" do you know , my dear cyrus , " said gideon spilett , " that the explanation you gave yesterday on the subject of the bottle has not satisfied me at all !
" nor was it he who threw it in , my dear spilett . "
" you think then-- "
" i think nothing , i know nothing ! " interrupted cyrus harding .
" i am content to rank this incident among those which i have not been able to explain to this day ! "
" indeed , cyrus , " said spilett , " these things are incredible !
your rescue , the case stranded on the sand , top 's adventure , and lastly this bottle ... shall we never have the answer to these enigmas ? "
" yes ! " replied the engineer quickly , " yes , even if i have to penetrate into the bowels of this island ! "
" chance will perhaps give us the key to this mystery ! "
" chance !
i do not believe in chance , any more than i believe in mysteries in this world .
there is a reason for everything unaccountable which has happened here , and that reason i shall discover .
but in the meantime we must work and observe . "
during the days which followed , herbert and spilett having gone in the direction of the corral , ascertained that ayrton had taken possession of the habitation which had been prepared for him .
he busied himself with the numerous flock confided to his care , and spared his companions the trouble of coming every two or three days to visit the corral .
nevertheless , in order not to leave ayrton in solitude for too long a time , the settlers often paid him a visit .
nevertheless it might happen that something would occur which it would be necessary to bring rapidly to the engineer 's knowledge .
it was on the 10th of january that he made known his project to his companions .
" why ! how are you going to manage that , captain ? " asked pencroft .
" do you by chance happen to think of establishing a telegraph ? "
" exactly so , " answered the engineer .
" electric ? " cried herbert .
" electric , " replied cyrus harding .
" well , after that , " returned the sailor , " i shall never despair of seeing ourselves some day rolling along on a railway ! "
they then set to work , beginning with the most difficult thing , for , if they failed in that , it would be useless to manufacture the battery and other accessories .
the iron of lincoln island , as has been said , was of excellent quality , and consequently very fit for being drawn out .
harding commenced by manufacturing a drawplate , that is to say , a plate of steel , pierced with conical holes of different sizes , which would successively bring the wire to the wished - for tenacity .
this piece of steel , after having been tempered , was fixed in as firm a way as possible in a solid framework planted in the ground , only a few feet from the great fall , the motive power of which the engineer intended to utilize .
in fact as the fulling - mill was there , although not then in use , its beam moved with extreme power would serve to stretch out the wire by rolling it round itself .
it was a delicate operation , and required much care .
finally , the engineer obtained wires from forty to fifty feet long , which could be easily fastened together and stretched over the distance of five miles , which separated the corral from the bounds of granite house .
it did not take more than a few days to perform this work , and indeed as soon as the machine had been commenced , cyrus harding left his companions to follow the trade of wiredrawers , and occupied himself with manufacturing his battery .
it was necessary to obtain a battery with a constant current .
it is known that the elements of modern batteries are generally composed of retort coal , zinc , and copper .
retort coal , that is to say , the hard graphite which is found in the retorts of gas manufactories , after the coal has been dehydrogenized , could have been obtained , but it would have been necessary to establish a special apparatus , involving great labor .
as to zinc , it may be remembered that the case found at flotsam point was lined with this metal , which could not be better utilized than for this purpose .
cyrus harding , after mature consideration , decided to manufacture a very simple battery , resembling as nearly as possible that invented by becquerel in 1820 , and in which zinc only is employed .
the other substances , azotic acid and potash , were all at his disposal .
the way in which the battery was composed was as follows , and the results were to be attained by the reaction of acid and potash on each other .
a number of glass bottles were made and filled with azotic acid .
the engineer corked them by means of a stopper through which passed a glass tube , bored at its lower extremity , and intended to be plunged into the acid by means of a clay stopper secured by a rag .
into this tube , through its upper extremity , he poured a solution of potash , previously obtained by burning and reducing to ashes various plants , and in this way the acid and potash could act on each other through the clay .
each bottle , therefore , produced as many currents as united would be sufficient to produce all the phenomena of the electric telegraph .
such was the ingenious and very simple apparatus constructed by cyrus harding , an apparatus which would allow them to establish a telegraphic communication between granite house and the corral .
on the 6th of february was commenced the planting along the road to the corral , of posts furnished with glass insulators , and intended to support the wire .
as to the receiver and manipulator , they were very simple .
at the two stations the wire was wound round a magnet , that is to say , round a piece of soft iron surrounded with a wire .
the communication was thus established between the two poles ; the current , starting from the positive pole , traversed the wire , passed through the magnet which was temporarily magnetized , and returned through the earth to the negative pole .
if the current was interrupted , the magnet immediately became unmagnetized .
it was sufficient to place a plate of soft iron before the magnet , which , attracted during the passage of the current , would fall back when the current was interrupted .
on this day , harding , having sent the current through the wire , asked if all was going on well at the corral , and received in a few moments a satisfactory reply from ayrton .
pencroft was wild with joy , and every morning and evening he sent a telegram to the corral , which always received an answer .
this mode of communication presented two very real advantages : firstly , because it enabled them to ascertain that ayrton was at the corral ; and secondly , that he was thus not left completely isolated .
besides , cyrus harding never allowed a week to pass without going to see him , and ayrton came from time to time to granite house , where he always found a cordial welcome .
the fine season passed away in the midst of the usual work .
the resources of the colony , particularly in vegetables and corn , increased from day to day , and the plants brought from tabor island had succeeded perfectly .
however , pencroft had thought of doing so , but cyrus harding having told him that even if he managed to count three hundred grains a minute , or nine thousand an hour , it would take him nearly five thousand five - hundred years to finish his task , the honest sailor considered it best to give up the idea .
the weather was splendid , the temperature very warm in the day time , but in the evening the sea - breezes tempered the heat of the atmosphere and procured cool nights for the inhabitants of granite house .
at this period the little colony was extremely prosperous .
the tenants of the poultry - yard swarmed , and they lived on the surplus , but it became necessary to reduce the population to a more moderate number .
the pigs had already produced young , and it may be understood that their care for these animals absorbed a great part of neb and pencroft 's time .
the onagers , who had two pretty colts , were most often mounted by gideon spilett and herbert , who had become an excellent rider under the reporter 's instruction , and they also harnessed them to the cart either for carrying wood and coal to granite house , or different mineral productions required by the engineer .
they thus visited all the left bank of the mercy , along which ran the road from the corral to the mouth of falls river .
but in these excursions the settlers took care to be well armed , for they met with savage wild boars , with which they often had a tussle .
they also , during this season , made fierce war against the jaguars .
gideon spilett had vowed a special hatred against them , and his pupil herbert seconded him well .
armed as they were , they no longer feared to meet one of those beasts .
the engineer sometimes took part in the expeditions made to the unknown parts of the island , which he surveyed with great attention .
it was for other traces than those of animals that he searched the thickets of the vast forest , but nothing suspicious ever appeared .
neither top nor jup , who accompanied him , ever betrayed by their behavior that there was anything strange there , and yet more than once again the dog barked at the mouth of the well , which the engineer had before explored without result .
at this time gideon spilett , aided by herbert , took several views of the most picturesque parts of the island , by means of the photographic apparatus found in the cases , and of which they had not as yet made any use .
this apparatus , provided with a powerful object - glass , was very complete .
even the papers were there , all prepared , and before laying in the printing - frame upon the negatives , it was sufficient to soak them for a few minutes in the solution of nitrate of silver .
nor did the photographers forget to take the portraits of all the inhabitants of the island , leaving out no one .
" it multiplies us , " said pencroft .
and the sailor was enchanted to see his own countenance , faithfully reproduced , ornamenting the walls of granite house , and he stopped as willingly before this exhibition as he would have done before the richest shop - windows in broadway .
but it must be acknowledged that the most successful portrait was incontestably that of master jup .
master jup had sat with a gravity not to be described , and his portrait was lifelike !
" he looks as if he was just going to grin ! " exclaimed pencroft .
and if master jup had not been satisfied , he would have been very difficult to please ; but he was quite contented and contemplated his own countenance with a sentimental air which expressed some small amount of conceit .
the summer heat ended with the month of march .
the weather was sometimes rainy , but still warm .
" hallo ! the islet is covered with snow ! "
" snow at this time ? " answered the reporter , joining the boy .
their companions were soon beside them , but could only ascertain one thing , that not only the islet but all the beach below granite house was covered with one uniform sheet of white .
" it must be snow ! " said pencroft .
" or rather it 's very like it ! " replied neb .
" but the thermometer marks fifty - eight degrees ! " observed gideon spilett .
cyrus harding gazed at the sheet of white without saying anything , for he really did not know how to explain this phenomenon , at this time of year and in such a temperature .
" by jove ! " exclaimed pencroft , " all our plants will be frozen ! "
and the sailor was about to descend , when he was preceded by the nimble jup , who slid down to the sand .
but the orang had not touched the ground , when the snowy sheet arose and dispersed in the air in such innumerable flakes that the light of the sun was obscured for some minutes .
" birds ! " cried herbert .
they were indeed swarms of sea - birds , with dazzling white plumage .
they had perched by thousands on the islet and on the shore , and they disappeared in the distance , leaving the colonists amazed as if they had been present at some transformation scene , in which summer succeeded winter at the touch of a fairy 's wand .
a few days after came the 26th of march , the day on which , two years before , the castaways from the air had been thrown upon lincoln island .
two years already ! and for two years the colonists had had no communication with their fellow - creatures !
they were without news from the civilized world , lost on this island , as completely as if they had been on the most minute star of the celestial hemisphere !
what was now happening in their country ?
the picture of their native land was always before their eyes , the land torn by civil war at the time they left it , and which the southern rebellion was perhaps still staining with blood !
it was a great sorrow to them , and they often talked together of these things , without ever doubting however that the cause of the north must triumph , for the honor of the american confederation .
during these two years not a vessel had passed in sight of the island ; or , at least , not a sail had been seen .
but the surrounding ocean was deserted as far as the eye could reach , and the colonists must rely on themselves for regaining their native land .
however , one chance of rescue existed , and this chance was discussed one day on the first week of april , when the colonists were gathered together in the dining - room of granite house .
they had been talking of america , of their native country , which they had so little hope of ever seeing again .
" decidedly we have only one way , " said spilett , " one single way for leaving lincoln island , and that is , to build a vessel large enough to sail several hundred miles .
" and in which we might go to the pomoutous , " added herbert , " just as easily as we went to tabor island . "
" i do not say no , " replied pencroft , who had always the casting vote in maritime questions ; " i do not say no , although it is not exactly the same thing to make a long as a short voyage !
if our little craft had been caught in any heavy gale of wind during the voyage to tabor island , we should have known that land was at no great distance either way ; but twelve hundred miles is a pretty long way , and the nearest land is at least that distance ! "
" would you not , in that case , pencroft , attempt the adventure ? " asked the reporter .
" i will attempt anything that is desired , mr . spilett , " answered the sailor , " and you know well that i am not a man to flinch ! "
" remember , besides , that we number another sailor amongst us now , " remarked neb .
" who is that ? " asked pencroft .
" ayrton . "
" if he will consent to come , " said pencroft .
" nonsense ! " returned the reporter ; " do you think that if lord glenarvan 's yacht had appeared at tabor island , while he was still living there , ayrton would have refused to depart ? "
" you forget , my friends , " then said cyrus harding , " that ayrton was not in possession of his reason during the last years of his stay there .
" yes , " said the reporter , " and i will add that he will return soon , for it is twelve years since ayrton was abandoned . "
" well ! " answered pencroft , " i agree with you that the nobleman will return , and soon too .
but where will he touch ? at tabor island , and not at lincoln island . "
" that is the more certain , " replied herbert , " as lincoln island is not even marked on the map . "
" therefore , my friends , " said the engineer , " we ought to take the necessary precautions for making our presence and that of ayrton on lincoln island known at tabor island . "
" certainly , " answered the reporter , " and nothing is easier than to place in the hut , which was captain grant 's and ayrton 's dwelling , a notice which lord glenarvan and his crew can not help finding , giving the position of our island . "
" it is a pity , " remarked the sailor , " that we forgot to take that precaution on our first visit to tabor island . "
" and why should we have done it ? " asked herbert .
" yes , " replied harding , " it was too late , and we must put off the voyage until next spring . "
" but suppose the scotch yacht comes before that , " said pencroft .
" that is not probable , " replied the engineer , " for lord glenarvan would not choose the winter season to venture into these seas .
either he has already returned to tabor island , since ayrton has been with us , that is to say , during the last five months and has left again ; or he will not come till later , and it will be time enough in the first fine october days to go to tabor island , and leave a notice there . "
" we must allow , " said neb , " that it will be very unfortunate if the ' duncan ' has returned to these parts only a few months ago ! "
" i hope that it is not so , " replied cyrus harding , " and that heaven has not deprived us of the best chance which remains to us . "
" that is evident , " answered the engineer .
" at any rate , " remarked pencroft , " it is well understood that if we do leave lincoln island , it will not be because we were uncomfortable there ! "
" no , pencroft , " replied the engineer , " it will be because we are far from all that a man holds dearest in the world , his family , his friends , his native land ! "
matters being thus decided , the building of a vessel large enough to sail either to the archipelagoes in the north , or to new zealand in the west , was no longer talked of , and they busied themselves in their accustomed occupations , with a view to wintering a third time in granite house .
however , it was agreed that before the stormy weather came on , their little vessel should be employed in making a voyage round the island .
a complete survey of the coast had not yet been made , and the colonists had but an imperfect idea of the shore to the west and north , from the mouth of falls river to the mandible capes , as well as of the narrow bay between them , which opened like a shark 's jaws .
the plan of this excursion was proposed by pencroft , and cyrus harding fully acquiesced in it , for he himself wished to see this part of his domain .
the weather was variable , but the barometer did not fluctuate by sudden movements , and they could therefore count on tolerable weather .
however , during the first week of april , after a sudden barometrical fall , a renewed rise was marked by a heavy gale of wind , lasting five or six days ; then the needle of the instrument remained stationary at a height of twenty - nine inches and nine - tenths , and the weather appeared propitious for an excursion .
the departure was fixed for the 16th of april , and the " bonadventure , " anchored in port balloon , was provisioned for a voyage which might be of some duration .
master jup was ordered to keep him company , and made no remonstrance .
on the morning of the 16th of april all the colonists , including top , embarked .
a fine breeze blew from the south - west , and the " bonadventure " tacked on leaving port balloon so as to reach reptile end .
of the ninety miles which the perimeter of the island measured , twenty included the south coast between the port and the promontory .
the wind being right ahead it was necessary to hug the shore .
it took the whole day to reach the promontory , for the vessel on leaving port had only two hours of ebb tide and had therefore to make way for six hours against the flood .
it was nightfall before the promontory was doubled .
it was agreed also that as they were anxious for a minute exploration of the coast they should not sail during the night , but would always , when the weather permitted it , be at anchor near the shore .
the passengers , with the exception of the sailor , scarcely slept as well on board the " bonadventure " as they would have done in their rooms at granite house , but they did sleep however .
pencroft set sail at break of day , and by going on the larboard tack they could keep close to the shore .
the colonists knew this beautiful wooded coast , since they had already explored it on foot , and yet it again excited their admiration .
several times also they anchored , and gideon spilett took photographs of the superb scenery .
about noon the " bonadventure " arrived at the mouth of falls river .
beyond , on the left bank , a few scattered trees appeared , and three miles further even these dwindled into solitary groups among the western spurs of the mountain , whose arid ridge sloped down to the shore .
what a contrast between the northern and southern part of the coast !
in proportion as one was woody and fertile so was the other rugged and barren !
they had not been able to perceive the sinister aspect of this shore from the summit of mount franklin , for they overlooked it from too great a height , but viewed from the sea it presented a wild appearance which could not perhaps be equaled in any corner of the globe .
an iceberg of the polar seas could not have been more capricious in its terrible sublimity !
here , bridges were thrown from one rock to another ; there , arches like those of a wave , into the depths of which the eye could not penetrate ; in one place , large vaulted excavations presented a monumental aspect ; in another , a crowd of columns , spires , and arches , such as no gothic cathedral ever possessed .
every caprice of nature , still more varied than those of the imagination , appeared on this grand coast , which extended over a length of eight or nine miles .
the engineer even observed that these barks had something strange in them , like those which the dog had uttered at the mouth of the well in granite house .
" let us go close in , " said he .
and the " bonadventure " sailed as near as possible to the rocky shore .
perhaps some cave , which it would be advisable to explore , existed there ?
but harding saw nothing , not a cavern , not a cleft which could serve as a retreat to any being whatever , for the foot of the cliff was washed by the surf .
soon top 's barks ceased , and the vessel continued her course at a few cables - length from the coast .
in the northwest part of the island the shore became again flat and sandy .
a few trees here and there rose above a low , marshy ground , which the colonists had already surveyed , and in violent contrast to the other desert shore , life was again manifested by the presence of myriads of water - fowl .
that evening the " bonadventure " anchored in a small bay to the north of the island , near the land , such was the depth of water there .
the night passed quietly , for the breeze died away with the last light of day , and only rose again with the first streaks of dawn .
as it was easy to land , the usual hunters of the colony , that is to say , herbert and gideon spilett , went for a ramble of two hours or so , and returned with several strings of wild duck and snipe .
top had done wonders , and not a bird had been lost , thanks to his zeal and cleverness .
at eight o'clock in the morning the " bonadventure " set sail , and ran rapidly towards north mandible cape , for the wind was right astern and freshening rapidly .
" however , " observed pencroft , " i should not be surprised if a gale came up from the west .
yesterday the sun set in a very red - looking horizon , and now , this morning , those mares - tails do n't forbode anything good . "
" well , " said harding , " let us carry as much sail as possible , and run for shelter into shark gulf .
i think that the ' bonadventure ' will be safe there . "
" perfectly , " replied pencroft , " and besides , the north coast is merely sand , very uninteresting to look at . "
" i shall not be sorry , " resumed the engineer , " to pass not only to - night but to - morrow in that bay , which is worth being carefully explored . "
" i think that we shall be obliged to do so , whether we like it or not , " answered pencroft , " for the sky looks very threatening towards the west .
dirty weather is coming on ! "
" at any rate we have a favorable wind for reaching cape mandible , " observed the reporter .
" a very fine wind , " replied the sailor ; " but we must tack to enter the gulf , and i should like to see my way clear in these unknown quarters . "
" quarters which appear to be filled with rocks , " added herbert , " if we judge by what we saw on the south coast of shark gulf . "
" pencroft , " said cyrus harding , " do as you think best , we will leave it to you . "
" do n't make your mind uneasy , captain , " replied the sailor , " i shall not expose myself needlessly !
i would rather a knife were run into my ribs than a sharp rock into those of my ' bonadventure ! ' "
that which pencroft called ribs was the part of his vessel under water , and he valued it more than his own skin .
" what o'clock is it ? " asked pencroft .
" ten o'clock , " replied gideon spilett .
" and what distance is it to the cape , captain ? "
" about fifteen miles , " replied the engineer .
" that 's a matter of two hours and a half , " said the sailor , " and we shall be off the cape between twelve and one o'clock .
unluckily , the tide will be turning at that moment , and will be ebbing out of the gulf .
" and the more so that it is a full moon to - day , " remarked herbert , " and these april tides are very strong . "
" well , pencroft , " asked harding , " can you not anchor off the cape ? "
" anchor near land , with bad weather coming on ! " exclaimed the sailor .
" what are you thinking of , captain ?
we should run aground , of a certainty ! "
" what will you do then ? "
" as i told you , pencroft , we will leave it to you , " answered harding .
" ah ! " said pencroft , " if there was only a lighthouse on the coast , it would be much more convenient for sailors . "
" yes , " replied herbert , " and this time we shall have no obliging engineer to light a fire to guide us into port ! "
" a fire ? " asked harding , much astonished at the reporter 's words .
" we mean , captain , " answered pencroft , " that on board the ' bonadventure ' we were very anxious during the few hours before our return , and we should have passed to windward of the island , if it had not been for the precaution you took of lighting a fire the night of the 19th of october , on prospect heights . "
" yes , yes ! that was a lucky idea of mine ! " replied the engineer .
" and this time , " continued the sailor , " unless the idea occurs to ayrton , there will be no one to do us that little service ! "
no one ! " answered cyrus harding .
a few minutes after , finding himself alone in the bows of the vessel , with the reporter , the engineer bent down and whispered,--
" if there is one thing certain in this world , spilett , it is that i never lighted any fire during the night of the 19th of october , neither on prospect heights nor on any other part of the island ! "
things happened as pencroft had predicted , he being seldom mistaken in his prognostications .
the wind rose , and from a fresh breeze it soon increased to a regular gale ; that is to say , it acquired a speed of from forty to forty - five miles an hour , before which a ship in the open sea would have run under close - reefed topsails .
hoisting the jib to the mainmast by way of a storm - sail , he hove to , putting the head of the vessel towards the land .
the " bonadventure " would doubtlessly not have capsized , for she was well ballasted , but enormous masses of water falling on the deck might injure her if her timbers could not sustain them .
pencroft , as a good sailor , was prepared for anything .
certainly , he had great confidence in his vessel , but nevertheless he awaited the return of day with some anxiety .
during the night , cyrus harding and gideon spilett had no opportunity for talking together , and yet the words pronounced in the reporter 's ear by the engineer were well worth being discussed , together with the mysterious influence which appeared to reign over lincoln island .
gideon spilett did not cease from pondering over this new and inexplicable incident , the appearance of a fire on the coast of the island .
spilett resolved to recur to this incident as soon as the " bonadventure " returned , and to urge cyrus harding to acquaint their companions with these strange facts .
perhaps it would be decided to make in common a complete investigation of every part of lincoln island .
however that might be , on this evening no fire was lighted on these yet unknown shores , which formed the entrance to the gulf , and the little vessel stood off during the night .
when the first streaks of dawn appeared in the western horizon , the wind , which had slightly fallen , shifted two points , and enabled pencroft to enter the narrow gulf with greater ease .
towards seven o'clock in the morning , the " bonadventure , " weathering the north mandible cape , entered the strait and glided on to the waters , so strangely enclosed in the frame of lava .
" well , " said pencroft , " this bay would make admirable roads , in which a whole fleet could lie at their ease ! "
" what is especially curious , " observed harding , " is that the gulf has been formed by two rivers of lava , thrown out by the volcano , and accumulated by successive eruptions .
the result is that the gulf is completely sheltered on all sides , and i believe that even in the stormiest weather , the sea here must be as calm as a lake . "
" no doubt , " returned the sailor , " since the wind has only that narrow entrance between the two capes to get in by , and , besides , the north cape protects that of the south in a way which would make the entrance of gusts very difficult .
i declare our ' bonadventure ' could stay here from one end of the year to the other , without even dragging at her anchor ! "
" it is rather large for her ! " observed the reporter .
mr . spilett , " replied the sailor , " i agree that it is too large for the ' bonadventure , ' but if the fleets of the union were in want of a harbor in the pacific , i do n't think they would ever find a better place than this ! "
" we are in the shark 's mouth , " remarked neb , alluding to the form of the gulf .
" right into its mouth , my honest neb ! " replied herbert , " but you are not afraid that it will shut upon us , are you ? "
" no , mr . herbert , " answered neb , " and yet this gulf here does n't please me much !
" hallo ! " cried pencroft , " here is neb turning up his nose at my gulf , just as i was thinking of presenting it to america ! "
" but , at any rate , is the water deep enough ? " asked the engineer , " for a depth sufficient for the keel of the ' bonadventure ' would not be enough for those of our iron - clads . "
" that is easily found out , " replied pencroft .
and the sailor sounded with a long cord , which served him as a lead - line , and to which was fastened a lump of iron .
this cord measured nearly fifty fathoms , and its entire length was unrolled without finding any bottom .
" there , " exclaimed pencroft , " our iron - clads can come here after all !
" indeed , " said gideon spilett , " this gulf is a regular abyss , but , taking into consideration the volcanic origin of the island , it is not astonishing that the sea should offer similar depressions . "
" that is all very well , " then said the reporter , " but i must point out to pencroft that his harbor is wanting in one very important respect ! "
" and what is that , mr . spilett ? "
" an opening , a cutting of some sort , to give access to the interior of the island .
i do not see a spot on which we could land . "
and , in fact , the steep lava cliffs did not afford a single place suitable for landing .
they formed an insuperable barrier , recalling , but with more wildness , the fiords of norway .
the " bonadventure , " coasting as close as possible along the cliffs , did not discover even a projection which would allow the passengers to leave the deck .
" ah ! " said neb , uttering a sigh of satisfaction .
one might really say that the honest negro did not feel at his ease in those enormous jaws .
the distance from mandible cape to the mouth of the mercy was not more than eight miles .
the head of the " bonadventure " was put towards granite house , and a fair wind filling her sails , she ran rapidly along the coast .
to the enormous lava rocks succeeded soon those capricious sand dunes , among which the engineer had been so singularly recovered , and which seabirds frequented in thousands .
about four o'clock , pencroft leaving the point of the islet on his left , entered the channel which separated it from the coast , and at five o'clock the anchor of the " bonadventure " was buried in the sand at the mouth of the mercy .
the colonists had been absent three days from their dwelling .
ayrton was waiting for them on the beach , and jup came joyously to meet them , giving vent to deep grunts of satisfaction .
a complete exploration of the coast of the island had now been made , and no suspicious appearances had been observed .
if any mysterious being resided on it , it could only be under cover of the impenetrable forest of the serpentine peninsula , to which the colonists had not yet directed their investigations .
gideon spilett discussed these things with the engineer , and it was agreed that they should direct the attention of their companions to the strange character of certain incidents which had occurred on the island , and of which the last was the most unaccountable .
however , harding , returning to the fact of a fire having been kindled on the shore by an unknown hand , could not refrain from repeating for the twentieth time to the reporter,--
" but are you quite sure of having seen it ?
was it not a partial eruption of the volcano , or perhaps some meteor ? "
" no , cyrus , " answered the reporter , " it was certainly a fire lighted by the hand of man .
in consequence , therefore , a few days after , on the 25th of april , in the evening , when the settlers were all collected on prospect heights , cyrus harding began by saying,--
" my friends , i think it my duty to call your attention to certain incidents which have occurred in the island , on the subject of which i shall be happy to have your advice .
these incidents are , so to speak , supernatural-- "
" supernatural ! " exclaimed the sailor , emitting a volume of smoke from his mouth .
" can it be possible that our island is supernatural ? "
" no , pencroft , but mysterious , most certainly , " replied the engineer ; " unless you can explain that which spilett and i have until now failed to understand . "
" speak away , captain , " answered the sailor .
" unless , being unconscious-- " said pencroft .
" that is not admissible , " replied the engineer .
" but to continue .
have you understood how top was able to discover your retreat five miles from the cave in which i was lying ? "
" the dog 's instinct-- " observed herbert .
" singular instinct ! " returned the reporter , " since notwithstanding the storm of rain and wind which was raging during that night , top arrived at the chimneys , dry and without a speck of mud ! "
" let us continue , " resumed the engineer .
" have you understood how our dog was so strangely thrown up out of the water of the lake , after his struggle with the dugong ? "
i confess , not at all , " replied pencroft , " and the wound which the dugong had in its side , a wound which seemed to have been made with a sharp instrument ; that ca n't be understood , either . "
" let us continue again , " said harding .
" ' pon my word , " said pencroft at last , " you are right , captain , and it is difficult to explain all these things ! "
" well , my friends , " resumed the engineer , " a last fact has just been added to these , and it is no less incomprehensible than the others ! "
" what is it , captain ? " asked herbert quickly .
" when you were returning from tabor island , pencroft , " continued the engineer , " you said that a fire appeared on lincoln island ? "
" certainly , " answered the sailor .
" and you are quite certain of having seen this fire ? "
" as sure as i see you now . "
" you also , herbert ? "
" why , captain , " cried herbert , " that fire was blazing like a star of the first magnitude ! "
" but was it not a star ? " urged the engineer .
" no , " replied pencroft , " for the sky was covered with thick clouds , and at any rate a star would not have been so low on the horizon .
but mr . spilett saw it as well as we , and he will confirm our words . "
" i will add , " said the reporter , " that the fire was very bright , and that it shot up like a sheet of lightning . "
" yes , yes ! exactly , " added herbert , " and it was certainly placed on the heights of granite house . "
" well , my friends , " replied cyrus harding , " during the night of the 19th of october , neither neb nor i lighted any fire on the coast . "
" you did not ! " exclaimed pencroft , in the height of his astonishment , not being able to finish his sentence .
" we did not leave granite house , " answered cyrus harding , " and if a fire appeared on the coast , it was lighted by another hand than ours ! "
could there be some being hidden in its profoundest recesses ?
it was necessary at any cost to ascertain this .
harding also reminded his companions of the singular behavior of top and jup when they prowled round the mouth of the well , which placed granite house in communication with the sea , and he told them that he had explored the well , without discovering anything suspicious .
the final resolve taken , in consequence of this conversation , by all the members of the colony , was that as soon as the fine season returned they would thoroughly search the whole of the island .
but from that day pencroft appeared to be anxious .
he felt as if the island which he had made his own personal property belonged to him entirely no longer , and that he shared it with another master , to whom , willing or not , he felt subject .
neb and he often talked of those unaccountable things , and both , their natures inclining them to the marvelous , were not far from believing that lincoln island was under the dominion of some supernatural power .
in the meanwhile , the bad weather came with the month of may , the november of the northern zones .
the preparations for the winter season were therefore commenced without delay .
nevertheless , the colonists were well prepared to meet the winter , however hard it might be .
they had plenty of felt clothing , and the musmons , very numerous by this time , had furnished an abundance of wool necessary for the manufacture of this warm material .
it is unnecessary to say that ayrton had been provided with this comfortable clothing .
from that time ayrton shared the common life , and made himself useful on all occasions ; but still humble and sad , he never took part in the pleasures of his companions .
immense waves threatened to overwhelm the island , and certainly any vessel anchored near the shore would have been dashed to pieces .
twice , during one of these hurricanes , the mercy swelled to such a degree as to give reason to fear that the bridges would be swept away , and it was necessary to strengthen those on the shore , which disappeared under the foaming waters , when the sea beat against the beach .
it may well be supposed that such storms , comparable to water - spouts in which were mingled rain and snow , would cause great havoc on the plateau of prospect heights .
during the worst weather , several jaguars and troops of quadrumana ventured to the edge of the plateau , and it was always to be feared that the most active and audacious would , urged by hunger , manage to cross the stream , which besides , when frozen , offered them an easy passage .
plantations and domestic animals would then have been infallibly destroyed , without a constant watch , and it was often necessary to make use of the guns to keep those dangerous visitors at a respectful distance .
occupation was not wanting to the colonists , for without reckoning their out - door cares , they had always a thousand plans for the fitting up of granite house .
they had also some fine sporting excursions , which were made during the frost in the vast tadorn marsh .
gideon spilett and herbert , aided by jup and top , did not miss a shot in the midst of myriads of wild - duck , snipe , teal , and others .
thus passed the four winter months , which were really rigorous , that is to say , june , july , august , and september .
but , in short , granite house did not suffer much from the inclemency of the weather , and it was the same with the corral , which , less exposed than the plateau , and sheltered partly by mount franklin , only received the remains of the hurricanes , already broken by the forests and the high rocks of the shore .
the damages there were consequently of small importance , and the activity and skill of ayrton promptly repaired them , when some time in october he returned to pass a few days in the corral .
during this winter , no fresh inexplicable incident occurred .
nothing strange happened , although pencroft and neb were on the watch for the most insignificant facts to which they attached any mysterious cause .
top and jup themselves no longer growled round the well or gave any signs of uneasiness .
it appeared , therefore , as if the series of supernatural incidents was interrupted , although they often talked of them during the evenings in granite house , and they remained thoroughly resolved that the island should be searched , even in those parts the most difficult to explore .
but an event of the highest importance , and of which the consequences might be terrible , momentarily diverted from their projects cyrus harding and his companions .
it was the month of october .
it may be remembered that gideon spilett and herbert had , at different times , taken photographic views of lincoln island .
the horizon was beautifully clear , and the sea , undulating under a soft breeze , was as calm as the waters of a lake , sparkling here and there under the sun 's rays .
the apparatus had been placed at one of the windows of the dining - room at granite house , and consequently overlooked the shore and the bay .
herbert proceeded as he was accustomed to do , and the negative obtained , he went away to fix it by means of the chemicals deposited in a dark nook of granite house .
" it is a flaw in the glass , " he thought .
and then he had the curiosity to examine this flaw with a strong magnifier which he unscrewed from one of the telescopes .
but he had scarcely looked at it , when he uttered a cry , and the glass almost fell from his hands .
immediately running to the room in which cyrus harding then was , he extended the negative and magnifier towards the engineer , pointing out the little spot .
harding examined it ; then seizing his telescope he rushed to the window .
the telescope , after having slowly swept the horizon , at last stopped on the looked - for spot , and cyrus harding , lowering it , pronounced one word only,-- " a vessel ! "
and in fact a vessel was in sight , off lincoln island !
part 3
the secret of the island
chapter 1
it was now two years and a half since the castaways from the balloon had been thrown on lincoln island , and during that period there had been no communication between them and their fellow - creatures .
once the reporter had attempted to communicate with the inhabited world by confiding to a bird a letter which contained the secret of their situation , but that was a chance on which it was impossible to reckon seriously .
ayrton , alone , under the circumstances which have been related , had come to join the little colony .
now , suddenly , on this day , the 17th of october , other men had unexpectedly appeared in sight of the island , on that deserted sea !
there could be no doubt about it !
a vessel was there !
but would she pass on , or would she put into port ?
in a few hours the colonists would definitely know what to expect .
cyrus harding and herbert having immediately called gideon spilett , pencroft , and neb into the dining - room of granite house , told them what had happened .
pencroft , seizing the telescope , rapidly swept the horizon , and stopping on the indicated point , that is to say , on that which had made the almost imperceptible spot on the photographic negative,--
" i 'm blessed but it is really a vessel ! " he exclaimed , in a voice which did not express any great amount of satisfaction .
" is she coming here ? " asked gideon spilett .
" impossible to say anything yet , " answered pencroft , " for her rigging alone is above the horizon , and not a bit of her hull can be seen . "
" what is to be done ? " asked the lad .
" wait , " replied harding .
certainly , the colonists were not in the situation of castaways abandoned on a sterile islet , constantly contending against a cruel nature for their miserable existence , and incessantly tormented by the longing to return to inhabited countries .
pencroft and neb , especially , who felt themselves at once so happy and so rich , would not have left their island without regret .
they were accustomed , besides , to this new life in the midst of the domain which their intelligence had as it were civilized .
but at any rate this ship brought news from the world , perhaps even from their native land .
it was bringing fellow - creatures to them , and it may be conceived how deeply their hearts were moved at the sight !
however , it was certain that the island , overtopped by mount franklin , could not escape the notice of the vessel 's lookout .
but why was the ship coming there ?
was it simple chance which brought it to that part of the pacific , where the maps mentioned no land except tabor island , which itself was out of the route usually followed by vessels from the polynesian archipelagoes , from new zealand , and from the american coast ?
to this question , which each one asked himself , a reply was suddenly made by herbert .
" can it be the ' duncan ' ? " he cried .
the " duncan , " as has been said , was lord glenarvan 's yacht , which had left ayrton on the islet , and which was to return there someday to fetch him .
now , the islet was not so far distant from lincoln island , but that a vessel , standing for the one , could pass in sight of the other .
a hundred and fifty miles only separated them in longitude , and seventy in latitude .
" we must tell ayrton , " said gideon spilett , " and send for him immediately .
he alone can say if it is the ' duncan . ' "
this was the opinion of all , and the reporter , going to the telegraphic apparatus which placed the corral in communication with granite house , sent this telegram:--"come with all possible speed . "
in a few minutes the bell sounded .
" i am coming , " replied ayrton .
then the settlers continued to watch the vessel .
" if it is the ' duncan , ' " said herbert , " ayrton will recognize her without difficulty , since he sailed on board her for some time . "
" and if he recognizes her , " added pencroft , " it will agitate him exceedingly ! "
" yes , " answered cyrus harding ; " but now ayrton is worthy to return on board the ' duncan , ' and pray heaven that it is indeed lord glenarvan 's yacht , for i should be suspicious of any other vessel .
these are ill - famed seas , and i have always feared a visit from malay pirates to our island . "
" we could defend it , ' , cried herbert .
" no doubt , my boy , " answered the engineer smiling , " but it would be better not to have to defend it . "
" a useless observation , " said spilett .
" lincoln island is unknown to navigators , since it is not marked even on the most recent maps .
do you think , cyrus , that that is a sufficient motive for a ship , finding herself unexpectedly in sight of new land , to try and visit rather than avoid it ? "
" certainly , " replied pencroft .
" well , " said pencroft , " suppose this vessel comes and anchors there a few cables - lengths from our island , what shall we do ? "
this sudden question remained at first without any reply .
" what we shall do , my friends ? what we ought to do is this:--we will communicate with the ship , we will take our passage on board her , and we will leave our island , after having taken possession of it in the name of the united states .
then we will return with any who may wish to follow us to colonize it definitely , and endow the american republic with a useful station in this part of the pacific ocean ! "
" hurrah ! " exclaimed pencroft , " and that will be no small present which we shall make to our country !
the colonization is already almost finished ; names are given to every part of the island ; there is a natural port , fresh water , roads , a telegraph , a dockyard , and manufactories ; and there will be nothing to be done but to inscribe lincoln island on the maps ! "
" but if anyone seizes it in our absence ? " observed gideon spilett .
for an hour it was impossible to say with any certainty whether the vessel was or was not standing towards lincoln island .
she was nearer , but in what direction was she sailing ?
this pencroft could not determine .
however , as the wind was blowing from the northeast , in all probability the vessel was sailing on the starboard tack .
besides , the wind was favorable for bringing her towards the island , and , the sea being calm , she would not be afraid to approach although the shallows were not marked on the chart .
towards four o'clock -- an hour after he had been sent for -- ayrton arrived at granite house .
he entered the dining - room saying,--
cyrus harding gave him his hand , as was his custom to do , and , leading him to the window,--
" ayrton , " said he , " we have begged you to come here for an important reason .
a ship is in sight of the island . "
ayrton at first paled slightly , and for a moment his eyes became dim ; then , leaning out the window , he surveyed the horizon , but could see nothing .
" take this telescope , " said spilett , " and look carefully , ayrton , for it is possible that this ship may be the ' duncan ' come to these seas for the purpose of taking you home again . "
" the ' duncan ! ' " murmured ayrton .
" already ? "
did not twelve years ' solitude on a desert island appear to him a sufficient expiation ?
did not the penitent yet feel himself pardoned , either in his own eyes or in the eyes of others ?
" no , " said he , " no ! it can not be the ' duncan ' ! "
" look , ayrton , " then said the engineer , " for it is necessary that we should know beforehand what to expect . "
ayrton took the glass and pointed it in the direction indicated .
during some minutes he examined the horizon without moving , without uttering a word .
then,--
" it is indeed a vessel , " said he , " but i do not think she is the ' duncan . ' "
" why do you not think so ? " asked gideon spilett .
" because the ' duncan ' is a steam - yacht , and i can not perceive any trace of smoke either above or near that vessel . "
" perhaps she is simply sailing , " observed pencroft .
" the wind is favorable for the direction which she appears to be taking , and she may be anxious to economize her coal , being so far from land . "
" it is possible that you may be right , mr . pencroft , " answered ayrton , " and that the vessel has extinguished her fires .
we must wait until she is nearer , and then we shall soon know what to expect . "
so saying , ayrton sat down in a corner of the room and remained silent .
the colonists again discussed the strange ship , but ayrton took no part in the conversation .
all were in such a mood that they found it impossible to continue their work .
was not his country that where his master was ?
as to the engineer , he remained plunged in deep thought , and in his heart feared rather than desired the arrival of the ship .
it was , therefore , reasonable to believe that the engineer 's apprehensions would not be justified , and that the presence of this vessel in the vicinity of the island was fraught with no danger .
pencroft , after a minute examination , was able positively to affirm that the vessel was rigged as a brig , and that she was standing obliquely towards the coast , on the starboard tack , under her topsails and top - gallant - sails .
this was confirmed by ayrton .
but by continuing in this direction she must soon disappear behind claw cape , as the wind was from the southwest , and to watch her it would be then necessary to ascend the height of washington bay , near port balloon -- a provoking circumstance , for it was already five o'clock in the evening , and the twilight would soon make any observation extremely difficult .
" what shall we do when night comes on ? " asked gideon spilett .
" shall we light a fire , so as to signal our presence on the coast ? "
this was a serious question , and yet , although the engineer still retained some of his presentiments , it was answered in the affirmative .
during the night the ship might disappear and leave for ever , and , this ship gone , would another ever return to the waters of lincoln island ?
who could foresee what the future would then have in store for the colonists ?
" yes , " said the reporter , " we ought to make known to that vessel , whoever she may be , that the island is inhabited .
to neglect the opportunity which is offered to us might be to create everlasting regrets . "
it was therefore decided that neb and pencroft should go to port balloon , and that there , at nightfall , they should light an immense fire , the blaze of which would necessarily attract the attention of the brig .
the brig was a good sailer , for she approached rapidly .
neb and pencroft put off their departure , therefore , and the glass was put into ayrton 's hands , that he might ascertain for certain whether the ship was or was not the " duncan . "
the scotch yacht was also rigged as a brig .
the question was , whether a chimney could be discerned between the two masts of the vessel , which was now at a distance of only five miles .
the horizon was still very clear .
the examination was easy , and ayrton soon let the glass fall again , saying--
" it is not the ' duncan ' ! it could not be ! "
pencroft again brought the brig within the range of the telescope , and could see that she was of between three and four hundred tons burden , wonderfully narrow , well - masted , admirably built , and must be a very rapid sailer .
but to what nation did she belong ?
that was difficult to say .
" and yet , " added the sailor , " a flag is floating from her peak , but i can not distinguish the colors of it . "
" in half an hour we shall be certain about that , " answered the reporter .
" besides , it is very evident that the intention of the captain of this ship is to land , and , consequently , if not today , to - morrow at the latest , we shall make his acquaintance . "
" never mind ! " said pencroft .
" it is best to know whom we have to deal with , and i shall not be sorry to recognize that fellow 's colors ! "
and , while thus speaking , the sailor never left the glass .
the brig 's ensign hung in folds , and it became more and more difficult to observe it .
the chilean flag?--but that is tri - color .
brazilian?--it is green .
japanese?--it is yellow and black , while this-- "
at that moment the breeze blew out the unknown flag .
ayrton seizing the telescope which the sailor had put down , put it to his eye , and in a hoarse voice,--
and indeed the somber bunting was floating from the mast of the brig , and they had now good reason for considering her to be a suspicious vessel !
had the engineer , then , been right in his presentiments ?
was this a pirate vessel ?
did she scour the pacific , competing with the malay proas which still infest it ?
for what had she come to look at the shores of lincoln island ?
was it to them an unknown island , ready to become a magazine for stolen cargoes ?
had she come to find on the coast a sheltered port for the winter months ?
was the settlers ' honest domain destined to be transformed into an infamous refuge -- the headquarters of the piracy of the pacific ?
no time was lost before discussing it .
" my friends , " said cyrus harding , " perhaps this vessel only wishes to survey the coast of the island .
there is a chance of it .
however that may be , we ought to do everything we can to hide our presence here .
the windmill on prospect heights is too easily seen .
let ayrton and neb go and take down the sails .
" and our vessel ? " said herbert .
" oh , " answered pencroft , " she is sheltered in port balloon , and i defy any of those rascals there to find her ! "
the engineer 's orders were immediately executed .
neb and ayrton ascended the plateau , and took the necessary precautions to conceal any indication of a settlement .
while they were thus occupied , their companions went to the border of jacamar wood , and brought back a large quantity of branches and creepers , which would at some distance appear as natural foliage , and thus disguise the windows in the granite cliff .
at the same time , the ammunition and guns were placed ready so as to be at hand in case of an unexpected attack .
when all these precautions had been taken,--
" yes , cyrus , " replied the reporter , " and if necessary we will die to defend it ! "
the engineer extended his hand to his companions , who pressed it warmly .
ayrton remained in his corner , not joining the colonists .
perhaps he , the former convict , still felt himself unworthy to do so !
cyrus harding understood what was passing in ayrton 's mind , and going to him--
" and you , ayrton , " he asked , " what will you do ? "
" my duty , " answered ayrton .
he then took up his station near the window and gazed through the foliage .
it was now half - past seven .
in the meanwhile the brig continued to advance towards union bay .
one might have said that at this distance she had already entered the vast bay , for a straight line drawn from claw cape to cape mandible would have rested on her starboard quarter .
was the brig about to penetrate far into the bay ?
that was the first question .
when once in the bay , would she anchor there ?
that was the second .
would she not content herself with only surveying the coast , and stand out to sea again without landing her crew ?
they would know this in an hour .
the colonists could do nothing but wait .
cyrus harding had not seen the suspected vessel hoist the black flag without deep anxiety .
was it not a direct menace against the work which he and his companions had till now conducted so successfully ?
had they formerly invaded it , so that certain unaccountable peculiarities might be explained in this way ?
did there exist in the as yet unexplored parts some accomplice ready to enter into communication with them ?
to all these questions which he mentally asked himself , harding knew not what to reply ; but he felt that the safety of the colony could not but be seriously threatened by the arrival of the brig .
however , he and his companions were determined to fight to the last gasp .
but how was this information to be obtained ?
night fell .
not a leaf rustled on the trees , not a ripple murmured on the shore .
nothing could be seen of the ship , all her lights being extinguished , and if she was still in sight of the island , her whereabouts could not be discovered .
" well ! who knows ? " said pencroft .
" perhaps that cursed craft will stand off during the night , and we shall see nothing of her at daybreak . "
as if in reply to the sailor 's observation , a bright light flashed in the darkness , and a cannon - shot was heard .
the vessel was still there and had guns on board .
six seconds elapsed between the flash and the report .
therefore the brig was about a mile and a quarter from the coast .
at the same time , the chains were heard rattling through the hawse - holes .
the vessel had just anchored in sight of granite house !
chapter 2
there was no longer any doubt as to the pirates ' intentions . they had dropped anchor at a short distance from the island , and it was evident that the next day by means of their boats they purposed to land on the beach !
cyrus harding and his companions were ready to act , but , determined though they were , they must not forget to be prudent .
perhaps their presence might still be concealed in the event of the pirates contenting themselves with landing on the shore without examining the interior of the island .
it might be , indeed , that their only intention was to obtain fresh water from the mercy , and it was not impossible that the bridge , thrown across a mile and a half from the mouth , and the manufactory at the chimneys might escape their notice .
but why was that flag hoisted at the brig 's peak ?
what was that shot fired for ?
pure bravado doubtless , unless it was a sign of the act of taking possession .
harding knew now that the vessel was well armed .
and what had the colonists of lincoln island to reply to the pirates ' guns ?
a few muskets only .
" however , " observed cyrus harding , " here we are in an impregnable position .
the enemy can not discover the mouth of the outlet , now that it is hidden under reeds and grass , and consequently it would be impossible for them to penetrate into granite house . "
" but our plantations , our poultry - yard , our corral , all , everything ! " exclaimed pencroft , stamping his foot .
" they may spoil everything , destroy everything in a few hours ! "
" everything , pencroft , " answered harding , " and we have no means of preventing them . "
" are they numerous ? that is the question , " said the reporter .
" if they are not more than a dozen , we shall be able to stop them , but forty , fifty , more perhaps ! "
" captain harding , " then said ayrton , advancing towards the engineer , " will you give me leave ? "
" for what , my friend ? "
" to go to that vessel to find out the strength of her crew . "
" but ayrton-- " answered the engineer , hesitating , " you will risk your life-- "
" why not , sir ? "
" that is more than your duty . "
" i have more than my duty to do , " replied ayrton .
" will you go to the ship in the boat ? " asked gideon spilett .
" no , sir , but i will swim .
a boat would be seen where a man may glide between wind and water . "
" do you know that the brig is a mile and a quarter from the shore ? " said herbert .
" i am a good swimmer , mr . herbert . "
" i tell you it is risking your life , " said the engineer .
" that is no matter , " answered ayrton .
" captain harding , i ask this as a favor .
perhaps it will be a means of raising me in my own eyes ! "
" go , ayrton , " replied the engineer , who felt sure that a refusal would have deeply wounded the former convict , now become an honest man .
" i will accompany you , " said pencroft .
" you mistrust me ! " said ayrton quickly .
" alas ! "
you interpret his words wrongly . "
" indeed , " returned the sailor , " i only propose to accompany ayrton as far as the islet .
it may be , although it is scarcely possible , that one of these villains has landed , and in that case two men will not be too many to hinder him from giving the alarm .
i will wait for ayrton on the islet , and he shall go alone to the vessel , since he has proposed to do so . "
these things agreed to , ayrton made preparations for his departure .
his plan was bold , but it might succeed , thanks to the darkness of the night .
once arrived at the vessel 's side , ayrton , holding on to the main chains , might reconnoiter the number and perhaps overhear the intentions of the pirates .
ayrton and pencroft , followed by their companions , descended to the beach .
pencroft and neb , during this time , had gone to fetch the boat , moored a few hundred feet higher up , on the bank of the mercy , and by the time they returned , ayrton was ready to start .
a coat was thrown over his shoulders , and the settlers all came round him to press his hand .
ayrton then shoved off with pencroft in the boat .
it was half - past ten in the evening when the two adventurers disappeared in the darkness .
their companions returned to wait at the chimneys .
but after a careful survey , it was evident that the islet was deserted .
ayrton then , followed by pencroft , crossed it with a rapid step , scaring the birds nestled in the holes of the rocks ; then , without hesitating , he plunged into the sea , and swam noiselessly in the direction of the ship , in which a few lights had recently appeared , showing her exact situation .
as to pencroft , he crouched down in a cleft of the rock , and awaited the return of his companion .
in the meanwhile , ayrton , swimming with a vigorous stroke , glided through the sheet of water without producing the slightest ripple .
the current bore him along and he rapidly receded from the shore .
half an hour afterwards , ayrton , without having been either seen or heard , arrived at the ship and caught hold of the main - chains .
he took breath , then , hoisting himself up , he managed to reach the extremity of the cutwater .
there were drying several pairs of sailors ' trousers .
then settling himself firmly , he listened .
and these were the sentences , accompanied with oaths , which principally struck ayrton:--
" our brig is a famous acquisition . "
" she sails well , and merits her name of the ' speedy . ' "
" she would show all the navy of norfolk a clean pair of heels . "
" hurrah for her captain ! "
" hurrah for bob harvey ! "
what ayrton felt when he overheard this fragment of conversation may be understood when it is known that in this bob harvey he recognized one of his old australian companions , a daring sailor , who had continued his criminal career .
bob harvey had seized , on the shores of norfolk island this brig , which was loaded with arms , ammunition , utensils , and tools of all sorts , destined for one of the sandwich islands .
all his gang had gone on board , and pirates after having been convicts , these wretches , more ferocious than the malays themselves , scoured the pacific , destroying vessels , and massacring their crews .
the convicts spoke loudly , they recounted their deeds , drinking deeply at the same time , and this is what ayrton gathered . the actual crew of the " speedy " was composed solely of english prisoners , escaped from norfolk island .
here it may be well to explain what this island was .
they numbered 500 , under an iron discipline , threatened with terrible punishments , and were guarded by 150 soldiers , and 150 employed under the orders of the governor .
it would be difficult to imagine a collection of greater ruffians .
sometimes,--although very rarely,--notwithstanding the extreme surveillance of which they were the object , many managed to escape , and seizing vessels which they surprised , they infested the polynesian archipelagoes .
the convicts were , for the most part , assembled under the poop ; but a few , stretched on the deck , were talking loudly .
it was in no way a signal , and no communication yet existed between the convicts and lincoln island .
the settlers ' domain was now menaced with terrible danger .
evidently the island , with its water , its harbor , its resources of all kinds so increased in value by the colonists , and the concealment afforded by granite house , could not but be convenient for the convicts ; in their hands it would become an excellent place of refuge , and , being unknown , it would assure them , for a long time perhaps , impunity and security .
evidently , also , the lives of the settlers would not be respected , and bob harvey and his accomplices ' first care would be to massacre them without mercy .
harding and his companions had , therefore , not even the choice of flying and hiding themselves in the island , since the convicts intended to reside there , and since , in the event of the " speedy " departing on an expedition , it was probable that some of the crew would remain on shore , so as to settle themselves there .
therefore , it would be necessary to fight , to destroy every one of these scoundrels , unworthy of pity , and against whom any means would be right .
so thought ayrton , and he well knew that cyrus harding would be of his way of thinking .
but was resistance and , in the last place , victory possible ?
that would depend on the equipment of the brig , and the number of men which she carried .
this ayrton resolved to learn at any cost , and as an hour after his arrival the vociferations had begun to die away , and as a large number of the convicts were already buried in a drunken sleep , ayrton did not hesitate to venture onto the " speedy 's " deck , which the extinguished lanterns now left in total darkness .
he hoisted himself onto the cutwater , and by the bowsprit arrived at the forecastle .
then , gliding among the convicts stretched here and there , he made the round of the ship , and found that the " speedy " carried four guns , which would throw shot of from eight to ten pounds in weight .
as to the men lying on the deck , they were about ten in number , but it was to be supposed that more were sleeping down below .
but now , thanks to ayrton 's devotion , cyrus harding would not be surprised , he would know the strength of his adversaries , and would make his arrangements accordingly .
cyrus harding evidently could not resist fifty ruffians , all well armed , who , either by penetrating by main force into granite house , or by starving out the besieged , could obtain from them what they wanted .
and then he thought of his preservers -- those who had made him again a man , and an honest mm , those to whom he owed all -- murdered without pity , their works destroyed , their island turned into a pirates ' den !
he would perish in the explosion , but he would have done his duty .
ayrton did not hesitate .
to reach the powder - room , which is always situated in the after - part of a vessel , was easy .
there would be no want of powder in a vessel which followed such a trade , and a spark would be enough to destroy it in an instant .
ayrton stole carefully along the between - decks , strewn with numerous sleepers , overcome more by drunkenness than sleep .
a lantern was lighted at the foot of the mainmast , round which was hung a gun - rack , furnished with weapons of all sorts .
ayrton took a revolver from the rack , and assured himself that it was loaded and primed .
he then glided towards the stern , so as to arrive under the brig 's poop at the powder - magazine .
it was difficult to proceed along the dimly lighted deck without stumbling over some half - sleeping convict , who retorted by oaths and kicks .
but at last he arrived at the partition dividing the aftercabin , and found the door opening into the magazine itself .
ayrton , compelled to force it open , set to work .
" what are you doing here ? " asked a tail man , in a harsh voice , who , standing in the shadow , quickly threw the light of a lantern in ayrton 's face .
" what are you doing here ? " again said bob harvey , seizing ayrton by the waistband .
but ayrton , without replying , wrenched himself from his grasp and attempted to rush into the magazine .
a shot fired into the midst of the powder - casks , and all would be over !
" help , lads ! " shouted bob harvey .
at his shout two or three pirates awoke , jumped up , and , rushing on ayrton , endeavored to throw him down .
he soon extricated himself from their grasp .
he fired his revolver , and two of the convicts fell , but a blow from a knife which he could not ward off made a gash in his shoulder .
ayrton perceived that he could no longer hope to carry out his project .
bob harvey had reclosed the door of the powder - magazine , and a movement on the deck indicated a general awakening of the pirates .
but was flight still possible ?
it was doubtful , yet ayrton resolved to dare everything in order to rejoin his companions .
four barrels of the revolver were still undischarged .
two were fired -- one , aimed at bob harvey , did not wound him , or at any rate only slightly , and ayrton , profiting by the momentary retreat of his adversaries , rushed towards the companion - ladder to gain the deck .
passing before the lantern , he smashed it with a blow from the butt of his revolver . a profound darkness ensued , which favored his flight .
two or three pirates , awakened by the noise , were descending the ladder at the same moment .
a fifth shot from ayrton laid one low , and the others drew back , not understanding what was going on .
ayrton was on deck in two bounds , and three seconds later , having discharged his last barrel in the face of a pirate who was about to seize him by the throat , he leaped over the bulwarks into the sea .
ayrton had not made six strokes before shots were splashing around him like hail .
what were pencroft 's feelings , sheltered under a rock on the islet ! what were those of harding , the reporter , herbert , and neb , crouched in the chimneys , when they heard the reports on board the brig !
they rushed out on to the beach , and , their guns shouldered , they stood ready to repel any attack .
half an hour was passed in terrible anxiety .
the firing had ceased , and yet neither ayrton nor pencroft had reappeared .
was the islet invaded ?
ought they not to fly to the help of ayrton and pencroft ?
but how ?
the tide being high at that time , rendered the channel impassable .
we may imagine the horrible anxiety which took possession of harding and his companions !
at last , towards half - past twelve , a boat , carrying two men , touched the beach .
it was ayrton , slightly wounded in the shoulder , and pencroft , safe and sound , whom their friends received with open arms .
all immediately took refuge in the chimneys .
there ayrton recounted all that had passed , even to his plan for blowing up the brig , which he had attempted to put into execution .
all hands were extended to ayrton , who did not conceal from them that their situation was serious .
the pirates had been alarmed .
" well , we shall know how to die ! " said the reporter .
" let us go in and watch , " answered the engineer .
" have we any chance of escape , captain ? " asked the sailor .
" yes , pencroft . "
" hum ! six against fifty ! "
" yes ! six ! without counting-- "
" who ? " asked pencroft .
cyrus did not reply , but pointed upwards .
chapter 3
the night passed without incident .
the colonists were on the qui vive , and did not leave their post at the chimneys .
the pirates , on their side , did not appear to have made any attempt to land .
but it was no such thing , and when day began to dawn the settlers could see a confused mass through the morning mist .
it was the " speedy . "
the most important thing is , that the convicts should believe that the inhabitants of the island are numerous , and consequently capable of resisting them .
i therefore propose that we divide into three parties . the first of which shall be posted at the chimneys , the second at the mouth of the mercy .
as to the third , i think it would be best to place it on the islet , so as to prevent , or at all events delay , any attempt at landing .
we have nothing to fear from the muskets nor even from the guns of the brig .
what can they do against these rocks ?
and , as we shall not fire from the windows of granite house , the pirates will not think of causing irreparable damage by throwing shell against it .
what is to be feared is , the necessity of meeting hand - to - hand , since the convicts have numbers on their side .
we must therefore try to prevent them from landing , but without discovering ourselves .
we have each eight or ten enemies to kill , and they must be killed ! "
cyrus harding had clearly represented their situation , although he spoke in the calmest voice , as if it was a question of directing a piece of work and not ordering a battle .
his companions approved these arrangements without even uttering a word .
there was nothing more to be done but for each to take his place before the fog should be completely dissipated .
neb and pencroft immediately ascended to granite house and brought back a sufficient quantity of ammunition .
the posts were arranged in the following manner:--
cyrus harding and herbert remained in ambush at the chimneys , thus commanding the shore to the foot of granite house .
gideon spilett and neb crouched among the rocks at the mouth of the mercy , from which the drawbridges had been raised , so as to prevent any one from crossing in a boat or landing on the opposite shore .
as to ayrton and pencroft , they shoved off in the boat , and prepared to cross the channel and to take up two separate stations on the islet .
in this way , shots being fired from four different points at once , the convicts would be led to believe that the island was both largely peopled and strongly defended .
before starting to occupy their posts , the colonists for the last time wrung each other 's hands .
pencroft succeeded in controlling himself sufficiently to suppress his emotion when he embraced herbert , his boy ! and then they separated .
in a few moments harding and herbert on one side , the reporter and neb on the other , had disappeared behind the rocks , and five minutes later ayrton and pencroft , having without difficulty crossed the channel , disembarked on the islet and concealed themselves in the clefts of its eastern shore .
none of them could have been seen , for they themselves could scarcely distinguish the brig in the fog .
it was half - past six in the morning .
for some minutes great masses rolled over the surface of the sea , then a breeze sprang up , which rapidly dispelled the mist .
the " speedy " now appeared in full view , with a spring on her cable , her head to the north , presenting her larboard side to the island .
just as harding had calculated , she was not more than a mile and a quarter from the coast .
the sinister black flag floated from the peak .
in the meanwhile the " speedy " remained silent .
about thirty pirates could be seen moving on the deck .
a few more on the poop ; two others posted in the shrouds , and armed with spyglasses , were attentively surveying the island .
certainly , bob harvey and his crew would not be able easily to give an account of what had happened during the night on board the brig .
had he been able to swim to shore ?
had his design really been to blow up the brig , as bob harvey had thought ?
at any rate , there was no trace of dwellings .
thus probably the pirate captain reasoned , and doubtless , like a prudent man , he wished to reconnoiter the locality before he allowed his men to venture there .
it was not even probable that his attention had been awakened by the screen of green branches and creepers hiding the windows of granite house , and showing rather conspicuously on the bare rock .
indeed , how could he imagine that a dwelling was hollowed out , at that height , in the solid granite ?
from claw cape to the mandible capes , in all the extent of union bay , there was nothing to lead him to suppose that the island was or could be inhabited .
the pirates from their look - out could have seen that the coast was sheltered by an islet , separated from it by a channel half a mile in width .
however , it was soon evident to cyrus harding , on observing the direction followed by the boat , that they would not attempt to penetrate into the channel , but would land on the islet .
pencroft and ayrton , each hidden in a narrow cleft of the rock , saw them coming directly towards them , and waited till they were within range .
the boat advanced with extreme caution .
the oars only dipped into the water at long intervals .
it could now be seen that one of the convicts held a lead - line in his hand , and that he wished to fathom the depth of the channel hollowed out by the current of the mercy .
this showed that it was bob harvey 's intention to bring his brig as near as possible to the coast .
about thirty pirates , scattered in the rigging , followed every movement of the boat , and took the bearings of certain landmarks which would allow them to approach without danger .
the boat was not more than two cables - lengths off the islet when she stopped .
the man at the tiller stood up and looked for the best place at which to land .
at that moment two shots were heard .
smoke curled up from among the rocks of the islet .
the man at the helm and the man with the lead - line fell backwards into the boat .
ayrton 's and pencroft 's balls had struck them both at the same moment .
almost immediately a louder report was heard , a cloud of smoke issued from the brig 's side , and a ball , striking the summit of the rock which sheltered ayrton and pencroft , made it fly in splinters , but the two marksmen remained unhurt .
horrible imprecations burst from the boat , which immediately continued its way .
the man who had been at the tiller was replaced by one of his comrades , and the oars were rapidly plunged into the water .
however , instead of returning on board as might have been expected , the boat coasted along the islet , so as to round its southern point .
the pirates pulled vigorously at their oars that they might get out of range of the bullets .
they advanced to within five cables - lengths of that part of the shore terminated by flotsam point , and after having rounded it in a semicircular line , still protected by the brig 's guns , they proceeded towards the mouth of the mercy .
their evident intention was to penetrate into the channel , and cut off the colonists posted on the islet , in such a way , that whatever their number might be , being placed between the fire from the boat and the fire from the brig , they would find themselves in a very disadvantageous position .
twenty minutes after the first shots were fired , the boat was less than two cables - lengths off the mercy .
neb and spilett had not missed their aim .
the brig immediately sent a second ball on the post betrayed by the smoke , but without any other result than that of splintering the rock .
the boat now contained only three able men .
carried on by the current , it shot through the channel with the rapidity of an arrow , passed before harding and herbert , who , not thinking it within range , withheld their fire , then , rounding the northern point of the islet with the two remaining oars , they pulled towards the brig .
hitherto the settlers had nothing to complain of .
if the pirates continued to attack them in this way , if they renewed their attempt to land by means of a boat , they could be destroyed one by one .
it was now seen how advantageous the engineer 's arrangements had been .
the pirates would think that they had to deal with numerous and well - armed adversaries , whom they could not easily get the better of .
half an hour passed before the boat , having to pull against the current , could get alongside the " speedy . "
frightful cries were heard when they returned on board with the wounded , and two or three guns were fired with no results .
but now about a dozen other convicts , maddened with rage , and possibly by the effect of the evening 's potations , threw themselves into the boat .
a second boat was also lowered , in which eight men took their places , and while the first pulled straight for the islet , to dislodge the colonists from thence the second maneuvered so as to force the entrance of the mercy .
the situation was evidently becoming very dangerous for pencroft and ayrton , and they saw that they must regain the mainland .
almost at the same moment , fresh reports resounded from the mercy station , to which the second boat was rapidly approaching .
but the six survivors , holding their muskets above their heads to preserve them from contact with the water , managed to land on the right bank of the river .
the actual situation was this : on the islet were a dozen convicts , of whom some were no doubt wounded , but who had still a boat at their disposal ; on the island were six , but who could not by any possibility reach granite house , as they could not cross the river , all the bridges being raised .
" hallo , " exclaimed pencroft as he rushed into the chimneys , " hallo , captain !
what do you think of it , now ? "
" i think , " answered the engineer , " that the combat will now take a new form , for it can not be supposed that the convicts will be so foolish as to remain in a position so unfavorable for them ! "
" they wo n't cross the channel , " said the sailor .
" ayrton and mr . spilett 's rifles are there to prevent them .
you know that they carry more than a mile ! "
" no doubt , " replied herbert ; " but what can two rifles do against the brig 's guns ? "
" well , the brig is n't in the channel yet , i fancy ! " said pencroft .
" but suppose she does come there ? " said harding .
" that 's impossible , for she would risk running aground and being lost ! "
" it is possible , " said ayrton .
" the convicts might profit by the high tide to enter the channel , with the risk of grounding at low tide , it is true ; but then , under the fire from her guns , our posts would be no longer tenable . "
" confound them ! " exclaimed pencroft , " it really seems as if the blackguards were preparing to weigh anchor . "
" perhaps we shall be obliged to take refuge in granite house ! " observed herbert .
" but mr . spilett and neb ? " said pencroft .
" they will know when it is best to rejoin us .
be ready , ayrton .
it is yours and spilett 's rifles which must speak now . "
it was only too true .
the " speedy " was beginning to weigh her anchor , and her intention was evidently to approach the islet .
the tide would be rising for an hour and a half , and the ebb current being already weakened , it would be easy for the brig to advance .
but as to entering the channel , pencroft , contrary to ayrton 's opinion , could not believe that she would dare to attempt it .
in the meanwhile , the pirates who occupied the islet had gradually advanced to the opposite shore , and were now only separated from the mainland by the channel .
being armed with muskets alone , they could do no harm to the settlers , in ambush at the chimneys and the mouth of the mercy ; but , not knowing the latter to be supplied with long - range rifles , they on their side did not believe themselves to be exposed .
their illusion was of short duration .
ayrton 's and gideon spilett 's rifles then spoke , and no doubt imparted some very disagreeable intelligence to two of the convicts , for they fell backwards .
" eight less ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" really , one would have thought that mr . spilett and ayrton had given the word to fire together ! "
" gentlemen , " said ayrton , as he reloaded his gun , " this is becoming more serious .
" the anchor is weighed ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" yes , and she is already moving . "
the " speedy " was at first held by her anchor ; then , when that had been raised , she began to drift towards the shore .
the wind was blowing from the sea ; the jib and the foretopsail were hoisted , and the vessel gradually approached the island .
from the two posts of the mercy and the chimneys they watched her without giving a sign of life , but not without some emotion .
what could be more terrible for the colonists than to be exposed , at a short distance , to the brig 's guns , without being able to reply with any effect ?
how could they then prevent the pirates from landing ?
cyrus harding felt this strongly , and he asked himself what it would be possible to do .
before long , he would be called upon for his determination .
but what was it to be ?
to shut themselves up in granite house , to be besieged there , to remain there for weeks , for months even , since they had an abundance of provisions ?
so far good !
the pirates would not the less be masters of the island , which they would ravage at their pleasure , and in time , they would end by having their revenge on the prisoners in granite house .
however , one chance yet remained ; it was that bob harvey , after all , would not venture his ship into the channel , and that he would keep outside the islet .
he would be still separated from the coast by half a mile , and at that distance his shot could not be very destructive .
" never ! " repeated pencroft , " bob harvey will never , if he is a good seaman , enter that channel !
he knows well that it would risk the brig , if the sea got up ever so little !
in the meanwhile the brig approached the islet , and it could be seen that she was endeavoring to make the lower end .
the breeze was light , and as the current had then lost much of its force , bob harvey had absolute command over his vessel .
the route previously followed by the boats had allowed her to reconnoiter the channel , and she boldly entered it .
soon the " speedy " reached the point of the islet ; she rounded it with ease ; the mainsail was braced up , and the brig hugging the wind , stood across the mouth of the mercy .
" the scoundrels ! they are coming ! " said pencroft .
at that moment , cyrus harding , ayrton , the sailor , and herbert , were rejoined by neb and gideon spilett .
the reporter and his companion had judged it best to abandon the post at the mercy , from which they could do nothing against the ship , and they had acted wisely .
it was better that the colonists should be together at the moment when they were about to engage in a decisive action .
gideon spilett and neb had arrived by dodging behind the rocks , though not without attracting a shower of bullets , which had not , however , reached them .
neb ! " cried the engineer .
" no , " answered the reporter , " a few bruises only from the ricochet !
but that cursed brig has entered the channel ! "
" yes , " replied pencroft , " and in ten minutes she will have anchored before granite house ! "
" have you formed any plan , cyrus ? " asked the reporter .
" we must take refuge in granite house while there is still time , and the convicts can not see us . "
" that is , my opinion , too , " replied gideon spilett , " but once shut up-- "
" we must be guided by circumstances , " said the engineer .
" let us be off , then , and make haste ! " said the reporter .
" would you not wish , captain , that ayrton and i should remain here ? " asked the sailor .
" what would be the use of that , pencroft ? " replied harding .
we will not separate ! "
there was not a moment to be lost .
a bend of the cliff prevented them from being seen by those in the brig , but two or three reports , and the crash of bullets on the rock , told them that the " speedy " was at no great distance .
the rocks were splintered , and cheers accompanied each discharge .
" we are discovered ! " exclaimed pencroft .
the colonists had not , perhaps , been seen , but it was certain that bob harvey had thought proper to send a ball through the suspected foliage which concealed that part of the cliff .
soon he redoubled his attack , when another ball having torn away the leafy screen , disclosed a gaping aperture in the granite .
the colonists ' situation was desperate .
their retreat was discovered .
they could not oppose any obstacle to these missiles , nor protect the stone , which flew in splinters around them .
there was nothing to be done but to take refuge in the upper passage of granite house , and leave their dwelling to be devastated , when a deep roar was heard , followed by frightful cries !
cyrus harding and his companions rushed to one of the windows--
the brig , irresistibly raised on a sort of water - spout , had just split in two , and in less than ten seconds she was swallowed up with all her criminal crew !
" she has blown up ! " cried herbert .
" yes ! blown up , just as if ayrton had set fire to the powder ! " returned pencroft , throwing himself into the lift together with neb and the lad .
" but what has happened ? " asked gideon spilett , quite stunned by this unexpected catastrophe .
" oh ! this time , we shall know-- " answered the engineer quickly .
" what shall we know?-- "
" later ! later !
come , spilett .
the main point is that these pirates have been exterminated ! "
and cyrus harding , hurrying away the reporter and ayrton , joined pencroft , neb , and herbert on the beach .
nothing could be seen of the brig , not even her masts .
after having been raised by the water - spout , she had fallen on her side , and had sunk in that position , doubtless in consequence of some enormous leak .
but as in that place the channel was not more than twenty feet in depth , it was certain that the sides of the submerged brig would reappear at low water .
a few things from the wreck floated on the surface of the water , a raft could be seen consisting of spare spars , coops of poultry with their occupants still living , boxes and barrels , which gradually came to the surface , after having escaped through the hatchways , but no pieces of the wreck appeared , neither planks from the deck , nor timber from the hull,--which rendered the sudden disappearance of the " speedy " perfectly inexplicable .
but it was not necessary to wait for the tide to bring up these riches , and ayrton and pencroft jumped into the boat with the intention of towing the pieces of wreck either to the beach or to the islet .
but just as they were shoving off , an observation from gideon spilett arrested them .
" what about those six convicts who disembarked on the right bank of the mercy ? " said he .
in fact , it would not do to forget that the six men whose boat had gone to pieces on the rocks had landed at flotsam point .
it was probable that , having seen their vessel engulfed in the channel , they had fled into the interior of the island .
" we will deal with them later , " said harding .
" as they are armed , they will still be dangerous ; but as it is six against six , the chances are equal .
to the most pressing business first . "
ayrton and pencroft pulled vigorously towards the wreck .
the sea was calm and the tide very high , as there had been a new moon but two days before .
a whole hour at least would elapse before the hull of the brig could emerge from the water of the channel .
ayrton and pencroft were able to fasten the masts and spars by means of ropes , the ends of which were carried to the beach .
there , by the united efforts of the settlers the pieces of wreck were hauled up .
then the boat picked up all that was floating , coops , barrels , and boxes , which were immediately carried to the chimneys .
" that is what i have been , pencroft . "
" but what you are no longer , brave ayrton ! " returned the sailor warmly .
it was singular enough that so few bodies floated .
now the current , by carrying the bodies of these miserable men out to sea , would spare the colonists the sad task of burying them in some corner of their island .
for two hours , cyrus harding and his companions were solely occupied in hauling up the spars on to the sand , and then in spreading the sails which were perfectly uninjured , to dry .
they spoke little , for they were absorbed in their work , but what thoughts occupied their minds !
the possession of this brig , or rather all that she contained , was a perfect mine of wealth .
in fact , a ship is like a little world in miniature , and the stores of the colony would be increased by a large number of useful articles .
it would be , on a large scale , equivalent to the chest found at flotsam point .
" and besides , " thought pencroft , " why should it be impossible to refloat the brig ?
we could go anywhere we liked !
in fact , if the brig was still fit to navigate , the colonists ' chances of returning to their native land were singularly increased .
but , to decide this important question , it was necessary to wait until the tide was quite low , so that every part of the brig 's hull might be examined .
when their treasures had been safely conveyed on shore , harding and his companions agreed to devote some minutes to breakfast .
they were almost famished ; fortunately , the larder was not far off , and neb was noted for being an expeditious cook .
they breakfasted , therefore , near the chimneys , and during their repast , as may be supposed , nothing was talked of but the event which had so miraculously saved the colony .
" miraculous is the word , " repeated pencroft , " for it must be acknowledged that those rascals blew up just at the right moment !
granite house was beginning to be uncomfortable as a habitation ! "
" and can you guess , pencroft , " asked the reporter , " how it happened , or what can have occasioned the explosion ? "
mr . spilett , nothing is more simple , " answered pencroft .
" a convict vessel is not disciplined like a man - of - war !
convicts are not sailors .
of course the powder - magazine was open , and as they were firing incessantly , some careless or clumsy fellow just blew up the vessel ! "
" captain harding , " said herbert , " what astonishes me is that the explosion has not produced more effect .
the report was not loud , and besides there are so few planks and timbers torn out .
it seems as if the ship had rather foundered than blown up . "
" does that astonish you , my boy ? " asked the engineer .
" yes , captain . "
" and it astonishes me also , herbert , " replied he , " but when we visit the hull of the brig , we shall no doubt find the explanation of the matter . "
" why , captain , " said pencroft , " you do n't suppose that the ' speedy ' simply foundered like a ship which has struck on a rock ? "
" why not , " observed neb , " if there are rocks in the channel ? "
" nonsense , neb , " answered pencroft , " you did not look at the right moment .
an instant before she sank , the brig , as i saw perfectly well , rose on an enormous wave , and fell back on her larboard side .
now , if she had only struck , she would have sunk quietly and gone to the bottom like an honest vessel . "
" it was just because she was not an honest vessel ! " returned neb .
" well , we shall soon see , pencroft , " said the engineer .
" we shall soon see , " rejoined the sailor , " but i would wager my head there are no rocks in the channel .
look here , captain , to speak candidly , do you mean to say that there is anything marvelous in the occurrence ? "
cyrus harding did not answer .
" at any rate , " said gideon spilett , " whether rock or explosion , you will agree , pencroft , that it occurred just in the nick of time ! "
" yes ! yes ! " replied the sailor , " but that is not the question .
i ask captain harding if he sees anything supernatural in all this . "
" i can not say , pencroft , " said the engineer .
" that is all the answer i can make . "
he would never consent to admit that in that channel , with its fine sandy bed , just like the beach , which he had often crossed at low water , there could be an unknown rock .
and it must be confessed that the sailor 's arguments were reasonable .
towards half - past one , the colonists embarked in the boat to visit the wreck .
it was to be regretted that the brig 's two boats had not been saved ; but one , as has been said , had gone to pieces at the mouth of the mercy , and was absolutely useless ; the other had disappeared when the brig went down , and had not again been seen , having doubtless been crushed .
the hull of the " speedy " was just beginning to issue from the water .
the settlers rowed round the hull , and in proportion as the tide went down , they could ascertain , if not the cause which had occasioned the catastrophe , at least the effect produced .
towards the bows , on both sides of the keel , seven or eight feet from the beginning of the stem , the sides of the brig were frightfully torn .
" i 've a notion ! " exclaimed pencroft , " that this vessel will be difficult to get afloat again . "
" at any rate , " observed gideon spilett to the sailor , " the explosion , if there has been one , has produced singular effects !
it has split the lower part of the hull , instead of blowing up the deck and topsides !
these great rents appear rather to have been made by a rock than by the explosion of a powder - magazine . "
" there is not a rock in the channel ! " answered the sailor .
" i will admit anything you like , except the rock . "
" let us try to penetrate into the interior of the brig , " said the engineer ; " perhaps we shall then know what to think of the cause of her destruction . "
this was the best thing to be done , and it was agreed , besides , to take an inventory of all the treasures on board , and to arrange their preservation .
access to the interior of the brig was now easy .
they then busied themselves in placing all this cargo in safety .
the water would not return for several hours , and these hours must be employed in the most profitable way .
ayrton and pencroft had , at the entrance made in the hull , discovered tackle , which would serve to hoist up the barrels and chests .
the boat received them and transported them to the shore .
they took the articles as they came , intending to sort them afterwards .
at any rate , the settlers saw at once , with extreme satisfaction , that the brig possessed a very varied cargo -- an assortment of all sorts of articles , utensils , manufactured goods , and tools -- such as the ships which make the great coasting - trade of polynesia are usually laden with .
it was probable that they would find a little of everything , and they agreed that it was exactly what was necessary for the colony of lincoln island .
however -- and cyrus harding observed it in silent astonishment -- not only , as has been said , had the hull of the brig enormously suffered from the shock , whatever it was , that had occasioned the catastrophe , but the interior arrangements had been destroyed , especially towards the bows .
partitions and stanchions were smashed , as if some tremendous shell had burst in the interior of the brig .
the colonists could easily go fore and aft , after having removed the cases as they were extricated .
they were not heavy bales , which would have been difficult to remove , but simple packages , of which the stowage , besides , was no longer recognizable .
the colonists then reached the stern of the brig -- the part formerly surmounted by the poop .
it was there that , following ayrton 's directions , they must look for the powder - magazine .
cyrus harding thought that it had not exploded ; that it was possible some barrels might be saved , and that the powder , which is usually enclosed in metal coverings might not have suffered from contact with the water .
this , in fact , was just what had happened .
they extricated from among a large number of shot twenty barrels , the insides of which were lined with copper .
pencroft was convinced by the evidence of his own eyes that the destruction of the " speedy " could not be attributed to an explosion .
that part of the hull in which the magazine was situated was , moreover , that which had suffered least .
" it may be so , " said the obstinate sailor ; " but as to a rock , there is not one in the channel ! "
" then , how did it happen ? " asked herbert .
several hours had passed during these researches , and the tide began to flow .
it was now five o'clock in the evening .
most of them contained clothes , which , as may be believed , was well received .
there were enough to clothe a whole colony -- linen for every one 's use , shoes for every one 's feet .
" we are too rich ! " exclaimed pencroft , " but what are we going to do with all this ? "
ah , two years before , how these things would have been prized !
and now , even though the industrious colonists had provided themselves with tools , these treasures would find their use .
there was no want of space in the store - rooms of granite house , but that daytime would not allow them to stow away the whole .
although the bridges over the mercy were raised , the convicts would not be stopped by a river or a stream and , rendered desperate , these wretches would be capable of anything .
the morning came , however , without the convicts having attempted any attack .
master jup and top , on guard at the foot of granite house , would have quickly given the alarm .
the three following days -- the 19th , 20th , and 21st of october -- were employed in saving everything of value , or of any use whatever , either from the cargo or rigging of the brig .
at low tide they overhauled the hold -- at high tide they stowed away the rescued articles .
a great part of the copper sheathing had been torn from the hull , which every day sank lower .
but before the sand had swallowed the heavy things which had fallen through the bottom , ayrton and pencroft , diving to the bed of the channel , recovered the chains and anchors of the brig , the iron of her ballast , and even four guns , which , floated by means of empty casks , were brought to shore .
it may be seen that the arsenal of the colony had gained by the wreck , as well as the storerooms of granite house .
pencroft , always enthusiastic in his projects , already spoke of constructing a battery to command the channel and the mouth of the river .
with four guns , he engaged to prevent any fleet , " however powerful it might be , " from venturing into the waters of lincoln island !
in the meantime , when nothing remained of the brig but a useless hulk , bad weather came on , which soon finished her .
cyrus harding had intended to blow her up , so as to collect the remains on the shore , but a strong gale from the northeast and a heavy sea compelled him to economize his powder .
in fact , on the night of the 23rd , the hull entirely broke up , and some of the wreck was cast up on the beach .
as to the papers on board , it is useless to say that , although he carefully searched the lockers of the poop , harding did not discover any trace of them .
the pirates had evidently destroyed everything that concerned either the captain or the owners of the " speedy , " and , as the name of her port was not painted on her counter , there was nothing which would tell them her nationality .
however , by the shape of her boats ayrton and pencroft believed that the brig was of english build .
a week after the castrophe -- or , rather , after the fortunate , though inexplicable , event to which the colony owed its preservation -- nothing more could be seen of the vessel , even at low tide .
the wreck had disappeared , and granite house was enriched by nearly all it had contained .
however , the mystery which enveloped its strange destruction would doubtless never have been cleared away if , on the 30th of november , neb , strolling on the beach , had not found a piece of a thick iron cylinder , bearing traces of explosion .
the edges of this cylinder were twisted and broken , as if they had been subjected to the action of some explosive substance .
neb brought this piece of metal to his master , who was then occupied with his companions in the workshop of the chimneys .
cyrus harding examined the cylinder attentively , then , turning to pencroft,--
" you persist , my friend , " said he , " in maintaining that the ' speedy ' was not lost in consequence of a collision ? "
" yes , captain , " answered the sailor .
" you know as well as i do that there are no rocks in the channel . "
" but suppose she had run against this piece of iron ? " said the engineer , showing the broken cylinder .
" what , that bit of pipe ! " exclaimed pencroft in a tone of perfect incredulity .
" my friends , " resumed harding , " you remember that before she foundered the brig rose on the summit of a regular waterspout ? "
" yes , captain , " replied herbert .
" well , would you like to know what occasioned that waterspout ?
it was this , " said the engineer , holding up the broken tube .
" that ? " returned pencroft .
" a torpedo ! " exclaimed the engineer 's companions .
" and who put the torpedo there ? " demanded pencroft , who did not like to yield .
" all that i can tell you is , that it was not i , " answered cyrus harding ; " but it was there , and you have been able to judge of its incomparable power ! "
chapter 5
so , then , all was explained by the submarine explosion of this torpedo .
cyrus harding could not be mistaken , as , during the war of the union , he had had occasion to try these terrible engines of destruction .
it was under the action of this cylinder , charged with some explosive substance , nitro - glycerine , picrate , or some other material of the same nature , that the water of the channel had been raised like a dome , the bottom of the brig crushed in , and she had sunk instantly , the damage done to her hull being so considerable that it was impossible to refloat her .
the " speedy " had not been able to withstand a torpedo that would have destroyed an ironclad as easily as a fishing - boat !
yes ! all was explained , everything -- except the presence of the torpedo in the waters of the channel !
who this beneficent stranger is , whose intervention has , so fortunately for us , been manifested on many occasions , i can not imagine .
ayrton is indebted to him as much as we are , for , if it was the stranger who saved me from the waves after the fall from the balloon , evidently it was he who wrote the document , who placed the bottle in the channel , and who has made known to us the situation of our companion .
therefore , whoever he may be , whether shipwrecked , or exiled on our island , we shall be ungrateful , if we think ourselves freed from gratitude towards him .
we have contracted a debt , and i hope that we shall one day pay it . "
" you are right in speaking thus , my dear cyrus , " replied gideon spilett .
" yes , there is an almost all - powerful being , hidden in some part of the island , and whose influence has been singularly useful to our colony .
i will add that the unknown appears to possess means of action which border on the supernatural , if in the events of practical life the supernatural were recognizable .
is it he who is in secret communication with us by the well in granite house , and has he thus a knowledge of all our plans ?
was it he who threw us that bottle , when the vessel made her first cruise ?
was it he who threw top out of the lake , and killed the dugong ?
was it he , who as everything leads us to believe , saved you from the waves , and that under circumstances in which any one else would not have been able to act ?
if it was he , he possesses a power which renders him master of the elements . "
the reporter 's reasoning was just , and every one felt it to be so .
" yes , " rejoined cyrus harding , " if the intervention of a human being is not more questionable for us , i agree that he has at his disposal means of action beyond those possessed by humanity .
there is a mystery still , but if we discover the man , the mystery will be discovered also .
the question , then , is , ought we to respect the incognito of this generous being , or ought we to do everything to find him out ?
what is your opinion on the matter ? "
" my opinion , " said pencroft , " is that , whoever he may be , he is a brave man , and he has my esteem ! "
" be it so , " answered harding , " but that is not an answer , pencroft . "
" that 's not bad , what you say , neb , " observed pencroft .
" i am of neb 's opinion , " said gideon spilett , " but that is no reason for not attempting the adventure .
whether we find this mysterious being or not , we shall at least have fulfilled our duty towards him . "
" and you , my boy , give us your opinion , " said the engineer , turning to herbert .
" oh , " cried herbert , his countenance full of animation , " how i should like to thank him , he who saved you first , and who has now saved us ! "
" of course , my boy , " replied pencroft , " so would i and all of us .
i am not inquisitive , but i would give one of my eyes to see this individual face to face !
it seems to me that he must be handsome , tall , strong , with a splendid beard , radiant hair , and that he must be seated on clouds , a great ball in his hands ! "
" but , pencroft , " answered spilett , " you are describing a picture of the creator . "
" possibly , mr . spilett , " replied the sailor , " but that is how i imagine him ! "
" and you , ayrton ? " asked the engineer .
" captain harding , " replied ayrton , " i can give you no better advice in this matter .
whatever you do will be best ; when you wish me to join you in your researches , i am ready to follow you .
" i thank you , ayrton , " answered cyrus harding , " but i should like a more direct answer to the question i put to you .
you are our companion ; you have already endangered your life several times for us , and you , as well as the rest , ought to be consulted in the matter of any important decision .
speak , therefore . "
" captain harding , " replied ayrton , " i think that we ought to do everything to discover this unknown benefactor .
it was he , it could be only he who must have come to tabor island , who found there the wretch you knew , and who made known to you that there was an unfortunate man there to be saved . therefore it is , thanks to him , that i have become a man again .
no , i will never forget him ! "
" that is settled , then , " said cyrus harding .
" we will begin our researches as soon as possible .
for several days the colonists were actively employed in haymaking and the harvest .
before putting their project of exploring the yet unknown parts of the island into execution , they wished to get all possible work finished .
it was also the time for collecting the various vegetables from the tabor island plants .
all was stowed away , and happily there was no want of room in granite house , in which they might have housed all the treasures of the island .
the products of the colony were there , methodically arranged , and in a safe place , as may be believed , sheltered as much from animals as from man .
there was no fear of damp in the middle of that thick mass of granite .
as to the guns obtained from the brig , they were pretty pieces of ordnance , which , at pencroft 's entreaty , were hoisted by means of tackle and pulleys , right up into granite house ; embrasures were made between the windows , and the shining muzzles of the guns could soon be seen through the granite cliff .
from this height they commanded all union bay .
it was like a little gibraltar , and any vessel anchored off the islet would inevitably be exposed to the fire of this aerial battery .
" do you think that is useful ? " asked the engineer .
" it is more than useful , it is necessary !
without that how are we to know to what distance we can send one of those pretty shot with which we are provided ? "
" try them , pencroft , " replied the engineer .
" however , i think that in making the experiment , we ought to employ , not the ordinary powder , the supply of which , i think , should remain untouched , but the pyroxyle which will never fail us . "
" can the cannon support the shock of the pyroxyle ? " asked the reporter , who was not less anxious than pencroft to try the artillery of granite house .
" i believe so .
however , " added the engineer , " we will be prudent . "
the engineer was right in thinking that the guns were of excellent make .
made of forged steel , and breech - loaders , they ought consequently to be able to bear a considerable charge , and also have an enormous range .
in fact , as regards practical effect , the transit described by the ball ought to be as extended as possible , and this tension could only be obtained under the condition that the projectile should be impelled with a very great initial velocity .
" now , " said harding to his companions , " the initial velocity is in proportion to the quantity of powder used .
in the fabrication of these pieces , everything depends on employing a metal with the highest possible power of resistance , and steel is incontestably that metal of all others which resists the best .
i have , therefore , reason to believe that our guns will bear without risk the expansion of the pyroxyle gas , and will give excellent results . "
" we shall be a great deal more certain of that when we have tried them ! " answered pencroft .
it is unnecessary to say that the four cannons were in perfect order .
since they had been taken from the water , the sailor had bestowed great care upon them .
and now the pieces were as brilliant as if they had been on board a frigate of the united states navy .
on this day , therefore , in presence of all the members of the colony , including master jup and top , the four cannon were successively tried .
pencroft , holding the end of the quick - match , stood ready to fire .
at harding 's signal , he fired .
the second gun was pointed at the rocks at the end of flotsam point , and the shot striking a sharp rock nearly three miles from granite house , made it fly into splinters .
pencroft only was prouder than he !
such a shot , the honor of which belonged to his dear boy .
a tremendous report was heard , but the piece had held good , and the colonists rushing to the windows , saw the shot graze the rocks of mandible cape , nearly five miles from granite house , and disappear in shark gulf .
" well , captain , " exclaimed pencroft , whose cheers might have rivaled the reports themselves , " what do you say of our battery ?
all the pirates in the pacific have only to present themselves before granite house !
" believe me , pencroft , " replied the engineer , " it would be better not to have to make the experiment . "
" well , " said the sailor , " what ought to be done with regard to those six villains who are roaming about the island ?
are we to leave them to overrun our forests , our fields , our plantations ?
these pirates are regular jaguars , and it seems to me we ought not to hesitate to treat them as such !
what do you think , ayrton ? " added pencroft , turning to his companion .
ayrton hesitated at first to reply , and cyrus harding regretted that pencroft had so thoughtlessly put this question .
and he was much moved when ayrton replied in a humble tone,--
" i have been one of those jaguars , mr . pencroft . i have no right to speak . "
pencroft understood .
" what a brute i am ! " he exclaimed .
" poor ayrton !
he has as much right to speak here as any one ! "
" yes , " said gideon spilett , " but his reserve does him honor , and it is right to respect the feeling which he has about his sad past . "
" certainly , mr . spilett , " answered the sailor , " and there is no fear of my doing so again .
i would rather bite my tongue off than cause ayrton any pain !
" is that your opinion , pencroft ? " asked the engineer .
" quite my opinion . "
" and before hunting them mercilessly , you would not wait until they had committed some fresh act of hostility against us ? "
" is n't what they have done already enough ? " asked pencroft , who did not understand these scruples .
" they may adopt other sentiments ! " said harding , " and perhaps repent . "
" they repent ! " exclaimed the sailor , shrugging his shoulders .
" pencroft , think of ayrton ! " said herbert , taking the sailor 's hand .
" he became an honest man again ! "
" come ! " said be .
" everybody is against me !
you wish to be generous to those villains !
very well ; i hope we may n't repent it ! "
" what danger shall we run , " said herbert , " if we take care to be always on our guard ? "
" hum ! " observed the reporter , who had not given any decided opinion .
" they are six and well armed .
if they each lay hid in a corner , and each fired at one of us , they would soon be masters of the colony ! "
" why have they not done so ? " said herbert .
" no doubt because it was not their interest to do it .
besides , we are six also . "
" well , well ! " replied pencroft , whom no reasoning could have convinced .
" let us leave these good people to do what they like , and do n't think anything more about them ! "
" come , pencroft , " said neb , " do n't make yourself out so bad as all that !
suppose one of these unfortunate men were here before you , within good range of your guns , you would not fire . "
" i would fire on him as i would on a mad dog , neb , " replied pencroft coldly .
" pencroft , " said the engineer , " you have always shown much deference to my advice ; will you , in this matter , yield to me ? "
" i will do as you please , captain harding , " answered the sailor , who was not at all convinced .
" very well , wait , and we will not attack them unless we are attacked first . "
thus their behavior towards the pirates was agreed upon , although pencroft augured nothing good from it .
they were not to attack them , but were to be on their guard .
after all , the island was large and fertile .
if any sentiment of honesty yet remained in the bottom of their hearts , these wretches might perhaps be reclaimed .
was it not their interest in the situation in which they found themselves to begin a new life ?
at any rate , for humanity 's sake alone , it would be right to wait .
the colonists would no longer as before , be able to go and come without fear .
hitherto they had only wild beasts to guard against , and now six convicts of the worst description , perhaps , were roaming over their island .
it was serious , certainly , and to less brave men , it would have been security lost !
no matter !
at present , the colonists had reason on their side against pencroft .
would they be right in the future ?
that remained to be seen .
cyrus harding wished to set out without delay ; but as the expedition would be of some days duration , it appeared best to load the cart with different materials and tools in order to facilitate the organization of the encampments .
one of the onagers , however , having hurt its leg , could not be harnessed at present , and a few days ' rest was necessary . the departure was , therefore , put off for a week , until the 20th of november .
the month of november in this latitude corresponds to the month of may in the northern zones .
the sun was entering the tropic of capricorn , and gave the longest days in the year .
the time was , therefore , very favorable for the projected expedition , which , if it did not accomplish its principal object , would at any rate be fruitful in discoveries , especially of natural productions , since harding proposed to explore those dense forests of the far west , which stretched to the extremity of the serpentine peninsula .
during the nine days which preceded their departure , it was agreed that the work on prospect heights should be finished off .
moreover , it was necessary for ayrton to return to the corral , where the domesticated animals required his care .
it was decided that he should spend two days there , and return to granite house after having liberally supplied the stables .
as he was about to start , harding asked him if he would not like one of them to accompany him , observing that the island was less safe than formerly .
ayrton replied that this was unnecessary , as he was enough for the work , and that besides he apprehended no danger .
if anything occurred at the corral , or in the neighborhood , he could instantly warn the colonists by sending a telegram to granite house .
ayrton departed at dawn on the 9th , taking the cart drawn by one onager , and two hours after , the electric wire announced that he had found all in order at the corral .
during these two days harding busied himself in executing a project which would completely guard granite house against any surprise .
it was necessary to completely conceal the opening of the old outlet , which was already walled up and partly hidden under grass and plants , at the southern angle of lake grant .
nothing was easier , since if the level of the lake was raised two or three feet , the opening would be quite beneath it .
now , to raise this level they had only to establish a dam at the two openings made by the lake , and by which were fed creek glycerine and falls river .
the colonists worked with a will , and the two dams which besides did not exceed eight feet in width by three in height , were rapidly erected by means of well - cemented blocks of stone .
this work finished , it would have been impossible to guess that at that part of the lake , there existed a subterranean passage through which the overflow of the lake formerly escaped .
the lift once raised , this sure and comfortable retreat would be safe from any surprise .
this work had been so quickly done , that pencroft , gideon spilett , and herbert found time to make an expedition to port balloon , the sailor was very anxious to know if the little creek in which the " bonadventure " was moored , had been visited by the convicts .
pencroft 's apprehensions were not without foundation , and a visit to port balloon appeared to be very desirable .
the sailor and his companions set off on the 10th of november , after dinner , well armed .
pencroft , ostentatiously slipping two bullets into each barrel of his rifle , shook his head in a way which betokened nothing good to any one who approached too near him , whether " man or beast , " as he said .
gideon spilett and herbert also took their guns , and about three o'clock all three left granite house .
neb accompanied them to the turn of the mercy , and after they had crossed , he raised the bridge .
it was agreed that a gunshot should announce the colonists ' return , and that at the signal neb should return and reestablish the communication between the two banks of the river .
the little band advanced directly along the road which led to the southern coast of the island .
they found no trace of the fugitives who , no doubt , not having yet discovered the number of the colonists , or the means of defense which they had at their disposal , had gained the less accessible parts of the island .
arrived at port balloon , pencroft saw with extreme satisfaction that the " bonadventure " was tranquilly floating in the narrow creek .
" come , " said pencroft , " the blackguards have not been there yet .
long grass suits reptiles best , and evidently we shall find them in the far west . "
" and it 's very lucky , for if they had found the ' bonadventure ' , " added herbert , " they would have gone off in her , and we should have been prevented from returning to tabor island . "
" indeed , " remarked the reporter , " it will be important to take a document there which will make known the situation of lincoln island , and ayrton 's new residence , in case the scotch yacht returns to fetch him . "
" well , the ' bonadventure ' is always there , mr . spilett , " answered the sailor .
" she and her crew are ready to start at a moment 's notice ! "
" i think , pencroft , that that is a thing to be done after our exploration of the island is finished .
it is possible after all that the stranger , if we manage to find him , may know as much about tabor island as about lincoln island .
" but ! " exclaimed pencroft , " who in the world can he be ?
the fellow knows us and we know nothing about him !
if he is a simple castaway , why should he conceal himself !
we are honest men , i suppose , and the society of honest men is n't unpleasant to any one .
did he come here voluntarily ?
can he leave the island if he likes ?
is he here still ?
will he remain any longer ? "
chatting thus , pencroft , gideon spilett , and herbert got on board and looked about the deck of the " bonadventure . "
all at once , the sailor having examined the bitts to which the cable of the anchor was secured,--
" hallo , " he cried , " this is queer ! "
" what is the matter , pencroft ? " asked the reporter .
" the matter is , that it was not i who made this knot ! "
and pencroft showed a rope which fastened the cable to the bitt itself .
" what , it was not you ? " asked gideon spilett .
" no !
this is a reef knot , and i always make a running bowline . "
" you must be mistaken , pencroft . "
" i am not mistaken ! " declared the sailor .
" my hand does it so naturally , and one 's hand is never mistaken ! "
" then can the convicts have been on board ? " asked herbert .
" i know nothing about that , " answered pencroft , " but what is certain , is that some one has weighed the ' bonadventure 's ' anchor and dropped it again !
and look here , here is another proof !
the cable of the anchor has been run out , and its service is no longer at the hawse - hole .
i repeat that some one has been using our vessel ! "
" but if the convicts had used her , they would have pillaged her , or rather gone off with her . "
" gone off ! where to -- to tabor island ? " replied pencroft .
" do you think , they would risk themselves in a boat of such small tonnage ? "
" we must , besides , be sure that they know of the islet , " rejoined the reporter .
" however that may be , " said the sailor , " as sure as my name is bonadventure pencroft , of the vineyard , our ' bonadventure ' has sailed without us ! "
the sailor was positive that neither gideon spilett nor herbert could dispute his statement .
it was evident that the vessel had been moved , more or less , since pencroft had brought her to port balloon .
as to the sailor , he had not the slightest doubt that the anchor had been raised and then dropped again .
now , what was the use of these two maneuvers , unless the vessel had been employed in some expedition ?
" well , " resumed gideon spilett , " i ask again , what object could the convicts have had in using the ' bonadventure , ' and why , after they had made use of her , should they have brought her back to port ? "
" why , mr . spilett , " replied the sailor , " we must put that among the unaccountable things , and not think anything more about it .
the chief thing is that the ' bonadventure ' was there , and she is there now .
only , unfortunately , if the convicts take her a second time , we shall very likely not find her again in her place ! "
" then , pencroft , " said herbert , " would it not be wisest to bring the ' bonadventure ' off to granite house ? "
" but by hauling her up on the sand , to the foot of the chimneys ? "
" perhaps yes , " replied pencroft .
" at any rate , since we must leave granite house for a long expedition , i think the ' bonadventure ' will be safer here during our absence , and we shall do best to leave her here until the island is rid of these blackguards . "
" but suppose the convicts pay her another visit , " said herbert .
" well , my boy , " replied pencroft , " not finding her here , they would not be long in finding her on the sands of granite house , and , during our absence , nothing could hinder them from seizing her !
i agree , therefore , with mr . spilett , that she must be left in port balloon .
but , if on our return we have not rid the island of those rascals , it will be prudent to bring our boat to granite house , until the time when we need not fear any unpleasant visits . "
" that 's settled .
in this way , the " bonadventure " would be always within reach , under the eyes of the colonists , and if necessary , under lock and key .
that evening a telegram was sent to ayrton , requesting him to bring from the corral a couple of goats , which neb wished to acclimatize to the plateau .
singularly enough , ayrton did not acknowledge the receipt of the despatch , as he was accustomed to do .
in fact , two days had already passed since his departure , and it had been decided that on the evening of the 10th or at the latest the morning of the 11th , he should return .
the colonists waited , therefore , for ayrton to appear on prospect heights .
neb and herbert even watched at the bridge so as to be ready to lower it the moment their companion presented himself .
the bell of the telegraph at granite house remained mute .
the colonists ' uneasiness was great .
what had happened ?
was ayrton no longer at the corral , or if he was still there , had he no longer control over his movements ?
could they go to the corral in this dark night ?
they consulted .
" but , " said herbert , " perhaps some accident has happened to the telegraphic apparatus , so that it works no longer ? "
" that may be , " said the reporter .
" wait till to - morrow , " replied cyrus harding .
" it is possible , indeed , that ayrton has not received our despatch , or even that we have not received his . "
they waited , of course not without some anxiety .
at dawn of day , the 11th of november , harding again sent the electric current along the wire and received no reply .
he tried again : the same result .
" off to the corral , " said he .
" and well armed ! " added pencroft .
it was immediately decided that granite house should not be left alone and that neb should remain there .
after having accompanied his friends to creek glycerine , he raised the bridge ; and waiting behind a tree he watched for the return of either his companions or ayrton .
cyrus harding , gideon spilett , herbert , and pencroft were to repair to the corral , and if they did not find ayrton , search the neighboring woods .
at six o'clock in the morning , the engineer and his three companions had passed creek glycerine , and neb posted himself behind a small mound crowned by several dragon trees , on the left bank of the stream .
the colonists , after leaving the plateau of prospect heights , immediately took the road to the corral .
they shouldered their guns , ready to fire on the slightest hostile demonstration .
the two rifles and the two guns had been loaded with ball .
the wood was thick on each side of the road and might easily have concealed the convicts , who owing to their weapons would have been really formidable .
and they could be sure that the faithful dog would not allow them to be surprised , but would bark at the least appearance of danger .
after walking for nearly two miles , they had not as yet discovered any explanation of the difficulty .
the posts were in good order , the wire regularly extended .
however , at that moment the engineer observed that the wire appeared to be slack , and on arriving at post no . 74 , herbert , who was in advance stopped , exclaiming,--
" the wire is broken ! " his companions hurried forward and arrived at the spot where the lad was standing .
the post was rooted up and lying across the path .
" it was n't the wind that blew down this post , " observed pencroft .
" no , " replied gideon spilett .
" the earth has been dug up round its foot , and it has been torn up by the hand of man . "
" is the fracture recent ? " asked harding .
the colonists were now half way between granite house and the corral , having still two miles and a half to go .
they pressed forward with redoubled speed .
no doubt , ayrton might have sent a telegram which had not arrived , but this was not the reason why his companions were so uneasy , for , a more unaccountable circumstance , ayrton , who had promised to return the evening before , had not reappeared .
in short , it was not without a motive that all communication had been stopped between the corral and granite house , and who but the convicts could have any interest in interrupting this communication ?
the settlers hastened on , their hearts oppressed with anxiety .
they then moderated their pace so that they should not be out of breath at the moment when a struggle might be necessary .
top uttered sullen groans which were rather ominous .
at last the palisade appeared through the trees .
no trace of any damage could be seen .
" let us enter , " said cyrus harding .
and the engineer advanced , while his companions , keeping watch about twenty paces behind him , were ready to fire at a moment 's notice .
herbert , struck by a bullet , lay stretched on the ground .
chapter 7
at herbert 's cry , pencroft , letting his gun fall , rushed towards him .
" they have killed him ! " he cried .
" my boy !
they have killed him ! "
the reporter listened to ascertain if the poor lad 's heart was still beating .
" he lives , " said he , " but he must be carried-- "
" into the corral , then ! " said pencroft .
" in a moment , " said harding .
and he ran round the left corner of the palisade .
there he found a convict , who aiming at him , sent a ball through his hat .
in a few seconds , before he had even time to fire his second barrel , he fell , struck to the heart by harding 's dagger , more sure even than his gun .
in a few moments , harding was by his side .
on seeing herbert senseless , the sailor 's grief was terrible .
he sobbed , he cried , he tried to beat his head against the wall .
however , they knew that it depended on them to rescue from death the poor boy who was suffering beneath their eyes .
gideon spilett had not passed through the many incidents by which his life had been checkered without acquiring some slight knowledge of medicine .
assisted by cyrus harding , he proceeded to render the aid herbert required .
the reporter was immediately struck by the complete stupor in which herbert lay , a stupor owing either to the hemorrhage , or to the shock , the ball having struck a bone with sufficient force to produce a violent concussion .
herbert was deadly pale , and his pulse so feeble that spilett only felt it beat at long intervals , as if it was on the point of stopping .
herbert 's chest was laid bare , and the blood having been stanched with handkerchiefs , it was bathed with cold water .
the contusion , or rather the contused wound appeared,--an oval below the chest between the third and fourth ribs .
it was there that herbert had been hit by the bullet .
cyrus harding and gideon spilett then turned the poor boy over ; as they did so , he uttered a moan so feeble that they almost thought it was his last sigh .
herberts back was covered with blood from another contused wound , by which the ball had immediately escaped .
" god be praised ! " said the reporter , " the ball is not in the body , and we shall not have to extract it . "
" but the heart ? " asked harding .
" the heart has not been touched ; if it had been , herbert would be dead ! "
the sailor had only heard the last words uttered by the reporter .
" no , pencroft , " replied cyrus harding , " no !
he is not dead .
we have need of all our self - possession . "
pencroft was silent , but a reaction set in , and great tears rolled down his cheeks .
in the meanwhile , gideon spilett endeavored to collect his ideas , and proceed methodically .
after his examination he had no doubt that the ball , entering in front , between the seventh and eighth ribs , had issued behind between the third and fourth .
but what mischief had the ball committed in its passage ?
what important organs had been reached ?
a professional surgeon would have had difficulty in determining this at once , and still more so the reporter .
however , he knew one thing , this was that he would have to prevent the inflammatory strangulation of the injured parts , then to contend with the local inflammation and fever which would result from the wound , perhaps mortal !
now , what styptics , what antiphlogistics ought to be employed ?
by what means could inflammation be prevented ?
at any rate , the most important thing was that the two wounds should be dressed without delay .
the reporter , therefore , thought it best to simply bathe the two wounds with cold water .
herbert was placed on his left side , and was maintained in that position .
" he must not be moved . " said gideon spilett .
" he is in the most favorable position for the wounds in his back and chest to suppurate easily , and absolute rest is necessary . "
" what ! ca n't we carry him to granite house ? " asked pencroft .
" no , pencroft , " replied the reporter .
" i 'll pay the villains off ! " cried the sailor , shaking his fist in a menacing manner .
" pencroft ! " said cyrus harding .
gideon spilett had resumed his examination of the wounded boy .
herbert was still so frightfully pale , that the reporter felt anxious .
you must aid me with your advice , your experience ! " " take courage , my friend , " answered the engineer , pressing the reporter 's hand . " judge coolly .
think only of this : herbert must be saved ! " these words restored to gideon spilett that self - possession which he had lost in a moment of discouragement on feeling his great responsibility .
pencroft had torn up his shirt , and was mechanically making lint .
spilett then explained to cyrus harding that he thought he ought first of all to stop the hemorrhage , but not close the two wounds , or cause their immediate cicatrization , for there had been internal perforation , and the suppuration must not be allowed to accumulate in the chest .
harding approved entirely , and it was decided that the two wounds should be dressed without attempting to close them by immediate coaptation .
and now did the colonists possess an efficacious agent to act against the inflammation which might occur ?
they had cold water , that is to say , the most powerful sedative that can be employed against inflammation of wounds , the most efficacious therapeutic agent in grave cases , and the one which is now adopted by all physicians .
cold water has , moreover , the advantage of leaving the wound in absolute rest , and preserving it from all premature dressing , a considerable advantage , since it has been found by experience that contact with the air is dangerous during the first days .
gideon spilett and cyrus harding reasoned thus with their simple good sense , and they acted as the best surgeon would have done .
compresses of linen were applied to poor herbert 's two wounds , and were kept constantly wet with cold water .
the sailor had at first lighted a fire in the hut , which was not wanting in things necessary for life .
maple sugar , medicinal plants , the same which the lad had gathered on the banks of lake grant , enabled them to make some refreshing drinks , which they gave him without his taking any notice of it .
his fever was extremely high , and all that day and night passed without his becoming conscious .
herbert 's life hung on a thread , and this thread might break at any moment .
the next day , the 12th of november , the hopes of harding and his companions slightly revived .
however , herbert scarcely suffered at all , and the cold water with which they were constantly bathed , prevented any inflammation of the wounds .
the suppuration was established in a regular way , the fever did not increase , and it might now be hoped that this terrible wound would not involve any catastrophe .
herbert dozed again , but his sleep appeared more natural .
" tell me again that you hope , mr . spilett , " said pencroft .
" yes , we will save him ! " replied the reporter .
" the wound is serious , and , perhaps , even the ball has traversed the lungs , but the perforation of this organ is not fatal . "
" god bless you ! " answered pencroft .
as may be believed , during the four - and - twenty hours they had been in the corral , the colonists had no other thought than that of nursing herbert .
they did not think either of the danger which threatened them should the convicts return , or of the precautions to be taken for the future .
but on this day , while pencroft watched by the sick - bed , cyrus harding and the reporter consulted as to what it would be best to do .
first of all they examined the corral .
had the unhappy man been dragged away by his former accomplices ?
had he resisted , and been overcome in the struggle ?
this last supposition was only too probable .
gideon spilett , at the moment he scaled the palisade , had clearly seen some one of the convicts running along the southern spur of mount franklin , towards whom top had sprung .
it was one of those whose object had been so completely defeated by the rocks at the mouth of the mercy .
besides , the one killed by harding , and whose body was found outside the enclosure , of course belonged to bob harvey 's crew .
as to the corral , it had not suffered any damage .
the gates were closed , and the animals had not been able to disperse in the forest .
" the unhappy man has been surprised , " said harding , " and as he was a man to defend himself , he must have been overpowered . "
" yes , that is to be feared ! " said the reporter .
" then , doubtless , the convicts installed themselves in the corral where they found plenty of everything , and only fled when they saw us coming .
it is very evident , too , that at this moment ayrton , whether living or dead , is not here ! "
" we shall have to beat the forest , " said the engineer , " and rid the island of these wretches .
pencroft 's presentiments were not mistaken , when he wished to hunt them as wild beasts .
that would have spared us all these misfortunes ! "
" yes , " answered the reporter , " but now we have the right to be merciless ! "
" at any rate , " said the engineer , " we are obliged to wait some time , and to remain at the corral until we can carry herbert without danger to granite house . "
" but neb ? " asked the reporter .
" neb is in safety . "
" but if , uneasy at our absence , he would venture to come ? "
" he must not come ! " returned cyrus harding quickly .
" ah , if the telegraph still acted , he might be warned !
as to leaving pencroft and herbert here alone , we could not do it ! well , i will go alone to granite house . "
" no , no !
cyrus , " answered the reporter , " you must not expose yourself !
your courage would be of no avail .
the villains are evidently watching the corral , they are hidden in the thick woods which surround it , and if you go we shall soon have to regret two misfortunes instead of one ! "
" but neb ? " repeated the engineer .
" it is now four - and - twenty hours since he has had any news of us !
he will be sure to come ! "
" and as he will be less on his guard than we should be ourselves , " added spilett , " he will be killed ! "
" is there really no way of warning him ? "
" top ! " exclaimed cyrus harding .
the animal sprang at his master 's call .
" quick ! " said harding .
spilett rapidly tore a leaf from his note - book , and wrote these words:--
" herbert wounded .
we are at the corral .
be on your guard .
do not leave granite house .
have the convicts appeared in the neighborhood ?
reply by top . " this laconic note contained all that neb ought to know , and at the same time asked all that the colonists wished to know .
it was folded and fastened to top 's collar in a conspicuous position .
" top , my dog , " said the engineer , caressing the animal , " neb , top !
go , go ! "
top bounded at these words .
he understood , he knew what was expected of him .
the road to the corral was familiar to him .
in less than an hour he could clear it , and it might be hoped that where neither cyrus harding nor the reporter could have ventured without danger , top , running among the grass or in the wood , would pass unperceived .
the engineer went to the gate of the corral and opened it .
" neb , top !
neb ! " repeated the engineer , again pointing in the direction of granite house .
top sprang forwards , then almost immediately disappeared .
" he will get there ! " said the reporter .
" yes , and he will come back , the faithful animal ! "
" what o'clock is it ? " asked gideon spilett .
" ten . "
" in an hour he may be here .
we will watch for his return . "
the engineer and the reporter re - entered the house .
spilett , seeing there was nothing he could do at that moment , busied himself in preparing some nourishment , while attentively watching that part of the enclosure against the hill , at which an attack might be expected .
the settlers awaited top 's return with much anxiety .
a little before eleven o'clock , cyrus harding and the reporter , rifle in hand , were behind the gate , ready to open it at the first bark of their dog .
they did not doubt that if top had arrived safely at granite house , neb would have sent him back immediately .
they had both been there for about ten minutes , when a report was heard , followed by repeated barks .
the engineer opened the gate , and seeing smoke a hundred feet off in the wood , he fired in that direction .
almost immediately top bounded into the corral , and the gate was quickly shut .
" top , top ! " exclaimed the engineer , taking the dog 's great honest head between his hands .
a note was fastened to his neck , and cyrus harding read these words , traced in neb 's large writing:--"no pirates in the neighborhood of granite house .
i will not stir .
poor mr . herbert ! "
so the convicts were still there , watching the corral , and determined to kill the settlers one after the other .
but great precautions must be taken , for just now the wretches had the advantage on their side , seeing , and not being seen , being able to surprise by the suddenness of their attack , yet not to be surprised themselves .
harding made arrangements , therefore , for living in the corral , of which the provisions would last for a tolerable length of time .
ayrton 's house had been provided with all that was necessary for existence , and the convicts , scared by the arrival of the settlers , had not had time to pillage it .
it was probable , as gideon spilett observed , that things had occurred as follows : the six convicts , disembarking on the island , had followed the southern shore , and after having traversed the double shore of the serpentine peninsula , not being inclined to venture into the far west woods , they had reached the mouth of falls river .
from this point , by following the right bank of the watercourse , they would arrive at the spurs of mount franklin , among which they would naturally seek a retreat , and they could not have been long in discovering the corral , then uninhabited .
there they had regularly installed themselves , awaiting the moment to put their abominable schemes into execution .
ayrton 's arrival had surprised them , but they had managed to overpower the unfortunate man , and -- the rest may be easily imagined !
now , the convicts,--reduced to five , it is true , but well armed,--were roaming the woods , and to venture there was to expose themselves to their attacks , which could be neither guarded against nor prevented .
" when herbert is cured , we can organize a general battle of the island , and have satisfaction of these convicts .
that will be the object of our grand expedition at the same time-- "
" as the search for our mysterious protector , " added gideon spilett , finishing the engineer 's sentence .
" and it must be acknowledged , my dear cyrus , that this time his protection was wanting at the very moment when it was most necessary to us ! "
" who knows ? " replied the engineer .
" what do you mean ? " asked the reporter .
" that we are not at the end of our trouble yet , my dear spilett , and that his powerful intervention may have another opportunity of exercising itself .
but that is not the question now .
this was the colonists ' saddest thought .
several days passed , and the poor boy 's state was happily no worse .
the suppuration was much less abundant , and thanks to the incessant care by which he was surrounded!--herbert returned to life , and his fever abated .
he was besides subjected to a severe diet , and consequently his weakness was and would be extreme ; but there was no want of refreshing drinks , and absolute rest was of the greatest benefit to him .
cyrus harding , gideon spilett , and pencroft had become very skilful in dressing the lad 's wounds .
all the linen in the house had been sacrificed .
herbert 's wounds , covered with compresses and lint , were pressed neither too much nor too little , so as to cause their cicatrization without effecting any inflammatory reaction .
the reporter used extreme care in the dressing , knowing well the importance of it , and repeating to his companions that which most surgeons willingly admit , that it is perhaps rarer to see a dressing well done than an operation well performed .
the color was returning to his cheeks , and his bright eyes smiled at his nurses .
he talked a little , notwithstanding pencroft 's efforts , who talked incessantly to prevent him from beginning to speak , and told him the most improbable stories .
" humph ! " said pencroft , " these pirates ! they are gentlemen who have no right to any consideration !
and the captain wanted to win them by kindness !
i 'll send them some kindness , but in the shape of a good bullet ! "
" and have they not been seen again ? " asked herbert .
" well ! your strength will return gradually !
what 's a ball through the chest ?
nothing but a joke !
i 've seen many , and i do n't think much of them ! "
at last things appeared to be going on well , and if no complication occurred , herbert 's recovery might be regarded as certain .
but what would have been the condition of the colonists if his state had been aggravated,--if , for example , the ball had remained in his body , if his arm or his leg had had to be amputated ?
" no , " said spilett more than once , " i have never thought of such a contingency without shuddering ! "
" and yet , if it had been necessary to operate , " said harding one day to him , " you would not have hesitated ? "
" no , cyrus ! " said gideon spilett , " but thank god that we have been spared this complication ! "
as in so many other conjectures , the colonists had appealed to the logic of that simple good sense of which they had made use so often , and once more , thanks to their general knowledge , it had succeeded !
but might not a time come when all their science would be at fault ?
cyrus harding knew this well , and sometimes he asked if some circumstance might not occur which they would be powerless to surmount .
it appeared to him besides , that he and his companions , till then so fortunate , had entered into an unlucky period .
during the two years and a half which had elapsed since their escape from richmond , it might be said that they had had everything their own way .
the island had abundantly supplied them with minerals , vegetables , animals , and as nature had constantly loaded them , their science had known how to take advantage of what she offered them .
the wellbeing of the colony was therefore complete .
moreover , in certain occurrences an inexplicable influence had come to their aid ! ... but all that could only be for a time .
in short , cyrus harding believed that fortune had turned against them .
were these the first blows aimed by adverse fortune at the colonists ?
had this mysterious being , whatever he was , whose existence could not be denied , abandoned the island ?
they looked their situation in the face , they analyzed the chances , they prepared themselves for any event , they stood firm and straight before the future , and if adversity was at last to strike them , it would find in them men prepared to struggle against it .
however well built and supplied the corral house was , it could not be so comfortable as the healthy granite dwelling .
besides , it did not offer the same security , and its tenants , notwithstanding their watchfulness , were here always in fear of some shot from the convicts .
there , on the contrary , in the middle of that impregnable and inaccessible cliff , they would have nothing to fear , and any attack on their persons would certainly fail .
they therefore waited impatiently for the moment when herbert might be moved without danger from his wound , and they were determined to make this move , although the communication through jacamar wood was very difficult .
top had not been sent again to him , as it appeared useless to expose the faithful dog to some shot which might deprive the settlers of their most useful auxiliary .
they waited , therefore , although they were anxious to be reunited at granite house .
it pained the engineer to see his forces divided , for it gave great advantage to the pirates .
since ayrton 's disappearance they were only four against five , for herbert could not yet be counted , and this was not the least care of the brave boy , who well understood the trouble of which he was the cause .
the question of knowing how , in their condition , they were to act against the pirates , was thoroughly discussed on the 29th of november by cyrus harding , gideon spilett , and pencroft , at a moment when herbert was asleep and could not hear them .
" my friends , " said the reporter , after they had talked of neb and of the impossibility of communicating with him , " i think,--like you , that to venture on the road to the corral would be to risk receiving a gunshot without being able to return it .
but do you not think that the best thing to be done now is to openly give chase to these wretches ? "
" that is just what i was thinking , " answered pencroft .
" i believe we 're not fellows to be afraid of a bullet , and as for me , if captain harding approves , i 'm ready to dash into the forest !
why , hang it , one man is equal to another ! "
" but is he equal to five ? " asked the engineer .
" my dear spilett , and you , pencroft , " answered harding , " let us reason coolly .
if the convicts were hid in one spot of the island , if we knew that spot , and had only to dislodge them , i would undertake a direct attack ; but is there not occasion to fear , on the contrary , that they are sure to fire the first shot ? "
" well , captain , " cried pencroft , " a bullet does not always reach its mark . "
" that which struck herbert did not miss , pencroft , " replied the engineer .
" besides , observe that if both of you left the corral i should remain here alone to defend it .
" you are right , captain , " replied pencroft , his chest swelling with sullen anger .
" oh , if we were only at granite house ! "
" if we were at granite house , " answered the engineer , " the case would be very different .
there i should not be afraid to leave herbert with one , while the other three went to search the forests of the island .
but we are at the corral , and it is best to stay here until we can leave it together . "
cyrus harding 's reasoning was unanswerable , and his companions understood it well .
" if only ayrton was still one of us ! " said gideon spilett .
" poor fellow ! his return to social life will have been but of short duration . "
" if he is dead , " added pencroft , in a peculiar tone .
" do you hope , then , pencroft , that the villains have spared him ? " asked gideon spilett .
" yes , if they had any interest in doing so . "
" what ! you suppose that ayrton finding his old companions , forgetting all that he owes us-- "
" who knows ? " answered the sailor , who did not hazard this shameful supposition without hesitating .
" pencroft , " said harding , taking the sailor 's arm , " that is a wicked idea of yours , and you will distress me much if you persist in speaking thus .
i will answer for ayrton 's fidelity . "
" and i also , " added the reporter quickly .
i 'm not in my senses .
this imprisonment in the corral wearies me horribly , and i have never felt so excited as i do now .
" be patient , pencroft , " replied the engineer . " how long will it be , my dear spilett , before you think herbert may be carried to granite house ? "
" that is difficult to say , cyrus , " answered the reporter , " for any imprudence might involve terrible consequences .
but his convalescence is progressing , and if he continues to gain strength , in eight days from now -- well , we shall see . "
eight days !
that would put off the return to granite house until the first days of december .
at this time two months of spring had already passed .
the weather was fine , and the heat began to be great .
the forests of the island were in full leaf , and the time was approaching when the usual crops ought to be gathered .
the return to the plateau of prospect heights would , therefore , be followed by extensive agricultural labors , interrupted only by the projected expedition through the island .
once or twice the reporter ventured out into the road and made the tour of the palisade .
top accompanied him , and gideon spilett , his gun cocked , was ready for any emergency .
he met with no misadventure and found no suspicious traces .
his dog would have warned him of any danger , and , as top did not bark , it might be concluded that there was nothing to fear at the moment at least , and that the convicts were occupied in another part of the island .
however , on his second sortie , on the 27th of november , gideon spilett , who had ventured a quarter of a mile into the woods , towards the south of the mountain , remarked that top scented something .
the dog had no longer his unconcerned manner ; he went backwards and forwards , ferreting among the grass and bushes as if his smell had revealed some suspicious object to him .
it was not probable that top scented the presence of man , for in that case , he would have announced it by half - uttered , sullen , angry barks .
now , as he did not growl , it was because danger was neither near nor approaching .
nearly five minutes passed thus , top rummaging , the reporter following him prudently when , all at once , the dog rushed towards a thick bush , and drew out a rag .
it was a piece of cloth , stained and torn , which spilett immediately brought back to the corral .
there it was examined by the colonists , who found that it was a fragment of ayrton 's waistcoat , a piece of that felt , manufactured solely by the granite house factory .
" you see , pencroft , " observed harding , " there has been resistance on the part of the unfortunate ayrton .
the convicts have dragged him away in spite of himself !
do you still doubt his honesty ? "
" no , captain , " answered the sailor , " and i repented of my suspicion a long time ago !
but it seems to me that something may be learned from the incident . "
" what is that ? " asked the reporter .
that they dragged him away living , since he has resisted .
therefore , perhaps , he is still living ! "
" perhaps , indeed , " replied the engineer , who remained thoughtful .
but if the convicts had not killed him at first , if they had brought him living to another part of the island , might it not be admitted that he was still their prisoner ?
he would have been very useful to them , if they had been able to make him turn traitor !
this incident was , therefore , favorably interpreted at the corral , and it no longer appeared impossible that they should find ayrton again .
on his side , if he was only a prisoner , ayrton would no doubt do all he could to escape from the hands of the villains , and this would be a powerful aid to the settlers !
" oh !
i wish that he was there , at granite house ! " cried pencroft , " and that we were there , too !
for , although the rascals can do nothing to our house , they may plunder the plateau , our plantations , our poultry - yard ! "
pencroft had become a thorough farmer , heartily attached to his crops .
but it must be said that herbert was more anxious than any to return to granite house , for he knew how much the presence of the settlers was needed there .
and it was he who was keeping them at the corral !
therefore , one idea occupied his mind -- to leave the corral , and when !
several times he pressed gideon spilett , but the latter , fearing , with good reason , that herbert 's wounds , half healed , might reopen on the way , did not give the order to start .
however , something occurred which compelled cyrus harding and his two friends to yield to the lad 's wish , and god alone knew that this determination might cause them grief and remorse .
harding , pencroft , and spilett seized their guns and ran out of the house .
top , at the foot of the palisade , was jumping , barking , but it was with pleasure , not anger .
" some one is coming . "
" yes . "
" it is not an enemy ! "
" neb , perhaps ? "
" or ayrton ? "
these words had hardly been exchanged between the engineer and his two companions when a body leaped over the palisade and fell on the ground inside the corral .
it was jup , master jup in person , to whom top immediately gave a most cordial reception .
" jup ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" neb has sent him to us , " said the reporter .
" then , " replied the engineer , " he must have some note on him . "
pencroft rushed up to the orang .
certainly if neb had any important matter to communicate to his master he could not employ a more sure or more rapid messenger , who could pass where neither the colonists could , nor even top himself .
cyrus harding was not mistaken .
at jup 's neck hung a small bag , and in this bag was found a little note traced by neb 's hand .
the despair of harding and his companions may be imagined when they read these words:--
" friday , six o'clock in the morning .
" plateau invaded by convicts .
" neb . "
they gazed at each other without uttering a word , then they re - entered the house .
what were they to do ?
the convicts on prospect heights ! that was disaster , devastation , ruin .
herbert , on seeing the engineer , the reporter , and pencroft re - enter , guessed that their situation was aggravated , and when he saw jup , he no longer doubted that some misfortune menaced granite house .
" captain harding , " said he , " i must go ; i can bear the journey .
i must go . "
gideon spilett approached herbert ; then , having looked at him,--
" let us go , then ! " said he .
the question was quickly decided whether herbert should be carried on a litter or in the cart which had brought ayrton to the corral .
would they not , on the contrary , by employing the cart leave every arm free ?
was it impossible to place the mattress on which herbert was lying in it , and to advance with so much care that any jolt should be avoided ?
it could be done .
pencroft harnessed the onager .
cyrus harding and the reporter raised herbert 's mattress and placed it on the bottom of the cart .
the weather was fine .
the sun 's bright rays glanced through the trees .
" are the guns ready ? " asked cyrus harding .
they were .
the engineer and pencroft , each armed with a double - barreled gun , and gideon spilett carrying his rifle , had nothing to do but start .
" are you comfortable , herbert ? " asked the engineer .
" ah , captain , " replied the lad , " do n't be uneasy , i shall not die on the road ! "
while speaking thus , it could be seen that the poor boy had called up all his energy , and by the energy of a powerful will had collected his failing strength .
" forward ! " said harding .
the cart came out , the gate was reclosed , and the onager , led by pencroft , advanced at a slow pace .
cyrus harding and gideon spilett walked one on each side of the cart , ready to answer to any attack .
now , this note was dated six o'clock in the morning , and the active orang , accustomed to come frequently to the corral , had taken scarcely three quarters of an hour to cross the five miles which separated it from granite house .
they would , therefore , be safe at that time , and if there was any occasion for firing , it would probably not be until they were in the neighborhood of granite house .
however , the colonists kept a strict watch .
top and jup , the latter armed with his club , sometimes in front , sometimes beating the wood at the sides of the road , signalized no danger .
the cart advanced slowly under pencroft 's guidance .
it had left the corral at half - past seven .
an hour after , four out of the five miles had been cleared , without any incident having occurred .
the road was as deserted as all that part of the jacamar wood which lay between the mercy and the lake .
the wood appeared as deserted as on the day when the colonists first landed on the island .
cyrus harding expected to find it in its place ; supposing that the convicts would have crossed it , and that , after having passed one of the streams which enclosed the plateau , they would have taken the precaution to lower it again , so as to keep open a retreat .
at that moment pencroft stopped the onager , and in a hoarse voice,--
" oh ! the villains ! " he exclaimed .
and he pointed to a thick smoke rising from the mill , the sheds , and the buildings at the poultry - yard .
a man was moving about in the midst of the smoke .
it was neb .
his companions uttered a shout .
he heard , and ran to meet them .
the convicts had left the plateau nearly half - an - hour before , having devastated it !
" and mr . herbert ? " asked neb .
gideon spilett returned to the cart .
herbert had lost consciousness !
chapter 10
would the removal prove fatal to him by causing some internal injury ?
the reporter could not affirm it , but he and his companions almost despaired of the result .
the cart was brought to the bend of the river .
there some branches , disposed as a liner , received the mattress on which lay the unconscious herbert .
ten minutes after , cyrus harding , spilett , and pencroft were at the foot of the cliff , leaving neb to take the cart on to the plateau of prospect heights .
the lift was put in motion , and herbert was soon stretched on his bed in granite house .
what cares were lavished on him to bring him back to life !
he smiled for a moment on finding himself in his room , but could scarcely even murmur a few words , so great was his weakness .
there was nothing of the sort .
from whence , then , came this prostration ? why was herbert so much worse ?
the lad then fell into a kind of feverish sleep , and the reporter and pencroft remained near the bed .
during this time , harding told neb all that had happened at the corral , and neb recounted to his master the events of which the plateau had just been the theater .
it was only during the preceding night that the convicts had appeared on the edge of the forest , at the approaches to creek glycerine .
neb , who was watching near the poultry - yard , had not hesitated to fire at one of the pirates , who was about to cross the stream ; but in the darkness he could not tell whether the man had been hit or not .
at any rate , it was not enough to frighten away the band , and neb had only just time to get up to granite house , where at least he was in safety .
but what was he to do there ?
how prevent the devastations with which the convicts threatened the plateau ?
had neb any means by which to warn his master ?
and , besides , in what situation were the inhabitants of the corral themselves ?
cyrus harding and his companions had left on the 11th of november , and it was now the 29th .
what was he to do ? asked poor neb .
personally he had nothing to fear , for the convicts could not reach him in granite house .
but the buildings , the plantations , all their arrangements at the mercy of the pirates !
neb then thought of employing jup , and confiding a note to him .
he knew the orang 's great intelligence , which had been often put to the proof .
jup understood the word corral , which had been frequently pronounced before him , and it may be remembered , too , that he had often driven the cart thither in company with pencroft .
neb did not hesitate .
he wrote the note , he tied it to jup 's neck , he brought the ape to the door of granite house , from which he let down a long cord to the ground ; then , several times he repeated these words,--
" jup jup ! corral , corral ! "
the creature understood , seized the cord , glided rapidly down the beach , and disappeared in the darkness without the convicts ' attention having been in the least excited .
" you did well , neb , " said harding , " but perhaps in not warning us you would have done still better ! "
and , in speaking thus , cyrus harding thought of herbert , whose recovery the removal had so seriously checked .
neb ended his account .
the convicts had not appeared at all on the beach .
not knowing the number of the island 's inhabitants , they might suppose that granite house was defended by a large party .
they must have remembered that during the attack by the brig numerous shot had been fired both from the lower and upper rocks , and no doubt they did not wish to expose themselves .
but the plateau of prospect heights was open to them , and not covered by the fire of granite house .
they gave themselves up , therefore , to their instinct of destruction,--plundering , burning , devastating everything,--and only retiring half an hour before the arrival of the colonists , whom they believed still confined in the corral .
such had been these serious events .
the presence of the convicts constituted a permanent source of danger to the settlers in lincoln island , until then so happy , and who might now expect still greater misfortunes .
spilett remained in granite house with herbert and pencroft , while cyrus harding , accompanied by neb , proceeded to judge for himself of the extent of the disaster .
harding and neb proceeded towards the mercy , and ascended its left bank without meeting with any trace of the convicts ; nor on the other side of the river , in the depths of the wood , could they perceive any suspicious indications .
besides , it might be supposed that in all probability either the convicts knew of the return of the settlers to granite house , by having seen them pass on the road from the corral , or , after the devastation of the plateau , they had penetrated into jacamar wood , following the course of the mercy , and were thus ignorant of their return .
in the former case , they must have returned towards the corral , now without defenders , and which contained valuable stores .
in the latter , they must have regained their encampment , and would wait on opportunity to recommence the attack .
it was , therefore , possible to prevent them , but any enterprise to clear the island was now rendered difficult by reason of herbert 's condition .
indeed , their whole force would have been barely sufficient to cope with the convicts , and just now no one could leave granite house .
the engineer and neb arrived on the plateau .
happily , granite house possessed a store of seed which would enable them to repair these misfortunes .
as to the wall and buildings of the poultry - yard and the onagers stable , the fire had destroyed all .
a few terrified creatures roamed over the plateau .
the birds , which during the fire had taken refuge on the waters of the lake , had already returned to their accustomed spot , and were dabbling on the banks .
everything would have to be reconstructed .
cyrus harding 's face , which was paler than usual , expressed an internal anger which he commanded with difficulty , but he did not utter a word .
once more he looked at his devastated fields , and at the smoke which still rose from the ruins , then he returned to granite house .
the following days were the saddest of any that the colonists had passed on the island !
herbert 's weakness visibly increased .
in fact , herbert remained in an almost continuous state of drowsiness , and symptoms of delirium began to manifest themselves .
gideon spilett first recognized this on the 6th of december .
the poor boy , whose fingers , nose , and ears had become extremely pale , was at first seized with slight shiverings , horripilations , and tremblings .
his pulse was weak and irregular , his skin dry , his thirst intense .
to this soon succeeded a hot fit ; his face became flushed ; his skin reddened ; his pulse quick ; then a profuse perspiration broke out after which the fever seemed to diminish .
the attack had lasted nearly five hours .
gideon spilett had not left herbert , who , it was only too certain , was now seized by an intermittent fever , and this fever must be cured at any cost before it should assume a more serious aspect .
" a febrifuge-- " answered the engineer .
" we have neither peruvian bark , nor sulphate of quinine . "
" no , " said gideon spilett , " but there are willows on the border of the lake , and the bark of the willow might , perhaps , prove to be a substitute for quinine . "
" let us try it without losing a moment , " replied cyrus harding .
cyrus harding went himself to cut from the trunk of a species of black willow , a few pieces of bark ; he brought them back to granite house , and reduced them to a powder , which was administered that same evening to herbert .
the night passed without any important change .
pencroft again began to hope .
gideon spilett said nothing .
it might be that the fever was not quotidian , but tertian , and that it would return next day .
therefore , he awaited the next day with the greatest anxiety .
gideon spilett was overwhelmed by this new complication .
" it is a malignant fever , " said he .
" a malignant fever ! " cried harding .
" i am not mistaken , " replied the reporter .
" herbert no doubt contracted the germ of this fever in the marshes of the island .
" but the willow bark ? "
" that is insufficient , " answered the reporter , " and the third attack of a malignant fever , which is not arrested by means of quinine , is always fatal . "
fortunately , pencroft heard nothing of this conversation or he would have gone mad .
it may be imagined what anxiety the engineer and the reporter suffered during the day of the 7th of december and the following night .
towards the middle of the day the second attack came on .
he was so young to die ! the scene was heart - rending .
they were obliged to send pencroft away .
the fit lasted five hours .
it was evident that herbert could not survive a third .
the night was frightful .
in his delirium herbert uttered words which went to the hearts of his companions .
he struggled with the convicts , he called to ayrton , he poured forth entreaties to that mysterious being,--that powerful unknown protector,--whose image was stamped upon his mind ; then he again fell into a deep exhaustion which completely prostrated him .
several times gideon spilett thought that the poor boy was dead .
the next day , the 8th of december , was but a succession of the fainting fits .
herbert 's thin hands clutched the sheets .
they had administered further doses of pounded bark , but the reporter expected no result from it .
" if before tomorrow morning we have not given him a more energetic febrifuge , " said the reporter , " herbert will be dead . "
night arrived -- the last night , it was too much to be feared , of the good , brave , intelligent boy , so far in advance of his years , and who was loved by all as their own child .
the only remedy which existed against this terrible malignant fever , the only specific which could overcome it , was not to be found in lincoln island .
during the night of the 8th of december , herbert was seized by a more violent delirium .
his liver was fearfully congested , his brain affected , and already it was impossible for him to recognize any one .
would he live until the next day , until that third attack which must infallibly carry him off ?
it was not probable .
his strength was exhausted , and in the intervals of fever he lay as one dead .
towards three o'clock in the morning herbert uttered a piercing cry .
neb , who was near him , terrified , ran into the next room where his companions were watching .
top , at that moment , barked in a strange manner .
all rushed in immediately and managed to restrain the dying boy , who was endeavoring to throw himself out of his bed , while spilett , taking his arm , felt his pulse gradually quicken .
it was five in the morning .
the rays of the rising sun began to shine in at the windows of granite house .
it promised to be a fine day , and this day was to be poor herbert 's last ! a ray glanced on the table placed near the bed .
suddenly pencroft , uttering a cry , pointed to the table . on it lay a little oblong box , of which the cover bore these words:--"sulphate of quinine . "
gideon spilett took the box and opened it .
it contained nearly two hundred grains of a white powder , a few particles of which he carried to his lips .
the extreme bitterness of the substance precluded all doubt ; it was certainly the precious extract of quinine , that pre - eminent antifebrile .
this powder must be administered to herbert without delay .
how it came there might be discussed later .
" some coffee ! " said spilett .
in a few moments neb brought a cup of the warm infusion .
gideon spilett threw into it about eighteen grains of quinine , and they succeeded in making herbert drink the mixture .
there was still time , for the third attack of the malignant fever had not yet shown itself .
how they longed to be able to add that it would not return !
besides , it must be remarked , the hopes of all had now revived .
the mysterious influence had been again exerted , and in a critical moment , when they had despaired of it .
in a few hours herbert was much calmer .
but how had he been able to penetrate during the night into granite house ?
it was inexplicable , and , in truth , the proceedings of the genius of the island were not less mysterious than was that genius himself .
during this day the sulphate of quinine was administered to herbert every three hours .
the next day some improvement in herbert 's condition was apparent .
and besides , the specific was at hand ; nor , doubtless , was he who had brought it far distant !
and the hearts of all were animated by returning hope .
this hope was not disappointed .
ten days after , on the 20th of december , herbert 's convalescence commenced .
he longed so to get well !
pencroft was as a man who has been drawn up from the bottom of an abyss .
the real doctor , however , remained undiscovered .
" we will find him ! " repeated the sailor .
certainly , this man , whoever he was , might expect a somewhat too energetic embrace from the worthy pencroft !
the month of december ended , and with it the year 1867 , during which the colonists of lincoln island had of late been so severely tried .
herbert 's recovery progressed , and from his bed , placed near one of the windows of granite house , he could inhale the fresh air , charged with ozone , which could not fail to restore his health .
his appetite returned , and what numberless delicate , savory little dishes neb prepared for him !
" it is enough to make one wish to have a fever oneself ! " said pencroft .
during all this time , the convicts did not once appear in the vicinity of granite house .
there was no news of ayrton , and though the engineer and herbert still had some hopes of finding him again , their companions did not doubt but that the unfortunate man had perished .
however , this uncertainty could not last , and when once the lad should have recovered , the expedition , the result of which must be so important , would be undertaken .
but they would have to wait a month , perhaps , for all the strength of the colony must be put into requisition to obtain satisfaction from the convicts .
however , herbert 's convalescence progressed rapidly .
the congestion of the liver had disappeared , and his wounds might be considered completely healed .
during the month of january , important work was done on the plateau of prospect heights ; but it consisted solely in saving as much as was possible from the devastated crops , either of corn or vegetables .
the grain and the plants were gathered , so as to provide a new harvest for the approaching half - season .
when the island should be cleared of these miscreants , they would set about rebuilding .
the young convalescent began to get up in the second week of january , at first for one hour a day , then two , then three .
his strength visibly returned , so vigorous was his constitution .
towards the end of the month , herbert was already walking about on prospect heights , and the beach .
he derived , from several sea - baths , which he took in company with pencroft and neb , the greatest possible benefit .
cyrus harding thought he might now settle the day for their departure , for which the 15th of february was fixed .
the nights , very clear at this time of year , would be favorable to the researches they intended to make all over the island .
the necessary preparations for this exploration were now commenced , and were important , for the colonists had sworn not to return to granite house until their twofold object had been achieved ; on the one hand , to exterminate the convicts , and rescue ayrton , if he was still living ; on the other , to discover who it was that presided so effectually over the fortunes of the colony .
consequently , many millions of acres of the island had still escaped their investigations .
it was , therefore , decided that the expedition should be carried through the far west , so as to include all that region situated on the right of the mercy .
therefore , after some discussion , the first plan was adhered to , and the settlers resolved to proceed through the wood to reptile end .
they would make their way with their hatchets , and thus lay the first draft of a road which would place granite house in communication with the end of the peninsula for a length of from sixteen to seventeen miles .
provisions , camp effects , a portable stove , and various utensils were packed in the cart , as also weapons and ammunition , carefully chosen from the now complete arsenal of granite house .
it was therefore resolved that the little band of settlers should remain together and not separate under any pretext whatever .
it was also decided that no one should remain at granite house .
a place in the cart was reserved for herbert , who , though thoroughly convalescent , was still a little weak .
the next morning , at daybreak , cyrus harding took the necessary measures to protect granite house from any invasion .
pencroft stayed the last in granite house in order to finish this work , and he then lowered himself down by means of a double rope held below , and which , when once hauled down , left no communication between the upper landing and the beach .
the weather was magnificent .
" we shall have a warm day of it , " said the reporter , laughing .
" forward ! " said the engineer .
the cart was waiting on the beach before the chimneys .
the reporter made herbert take his place in it during the first hours at least of the journey , and the lad was obliged to submit to his doctor 's orders .
herbert offered a seat in his vehicle to jup , who accepted it without ceremony .
for the first two miles the widely scattered trees allowed the cart to pass with ease ; from time to time it became necessary to cut away a few creepers and bushes , but no serious obstacle impeded the progress of the colonists .
the thick foliage of the trees threw a grateful shade on the ground .
deodars , douglas firs , casuarinas , banksias , gum - trees , dragon - trees , and other well - known species , succeeded each other far as the eye could reach .
the feathered tribes of the island were all represented -- grouse , jacamars , pheasants , lories , as well as the chattering cockatoos , parrots , and paroquets .
agouties , kangaroos , and capybaras fled swiftly at their approach ; and all this reminded the settlers of the first excursions they had made on their arrival at the island .
and , in fact , in several places they could distinguish traces , more or less recent , of the passage of a band of men -- here branches broken off the trees , perhaps to mark out the way ; there the ashes of a fire , and footprints in clayey spots ; but nothing which appeared to belong to a settled encampment .
the engineer had recommended his companions to refrain from hunting .
moreover , the hunters would necessarily ramble some distance from the cart , which it was dangerous to leave unguarded .
in the afterpart of the day , when about six miles from granite house , their progress became much more difficult .
in order to make their way through some thickets , they were obliged to cut down trees .
the settlers made a hearty meal , for their appetites were sharpened , and measures were then taken that the night might be passed in safety .
if the engineer had had only to deal with wild beasts , jaguars or others , he would have simply lighted fires all around his camp , which would have sufficed for its defense ; but the convicts would be rather attracted than terrified by the flames , and it was , therefore , better to be surrounded by the profound darkness of night .
two of the settlers were to watch together , and every two hours it was agreed that they should be relieved by their comrades .
and so , notwithstanding his wish to the contrary , herbert was exempted from guard . pencroft and gideon spilett in one party , the engineer and neb in another , mounted guard in turns over the camp .
the night , however , was but of few hours .
the darkness was due rather to the thickness of the foliage than to the disappearance of the sun .
the silence was scarcely disturbed by the howling of jaguars and the chattering of the monkeys , the latter appearing to particularly irritate master jup .
the night passed without incident , and on the next day , the 15th of february , the journey through the forest , tedious rather than difficult , was continued .
this day they could not accomplish more than six miles , for every moment they were obliged to cut a road with their hatchets .
like true settlers , the colonists spared the largest and most beautiful trees , which would besides have cost immense labor to fell , and the small ones only were sacrificed , but the result was that the road took a very winding direction , and lengthened itself by numerous detours .
during the day herbert discovered several new specimens not before met with in the island , such as the tree - fern , with its leaves spread out like the waters of a fountain , locust - trees , on the long pods of which the onagers browsed greedily , and which supplied a sweet pulp of excellent flavor .
there , too , the colonists again found groups of magnificent kauries , their cylindrical trunks , crowded with a cone of verdure , rising to a height of two hundred feet .
these were the tree - kings of new zealand , as celebrated as the cedars of lebanon .
as to the fauna , there was no addition to those species already known to the hunters .
nevertheless , they saw , though unable to get near them , a couple of those large birds peculiar to australia , a sort of cassowary , called emu , five feet in height , and with brown plumage , which belong to the tribe of waders .
top darted after them as fast as his four legs could carry him , but the emus distanced him with ease , so prodigious was their speed .
as to the traces left by the convicts , a few more were discovered .
some footprints found near an apparently recently extinguished fire were attentively examined by the settlers .
by measuring them one after the other , according to their length and breadth , the marks of five men 's feet were easily distinguished .
the five convicts had evidently camped on this spot ; but,--and this was the object of so minute an examination,--a sixth footprint could not be discovered , which in that case would have been that of ayrton .
" ayrton was not with them ! " said herbert .
" no , " answered pencroft , " and if he was not with them , it was because the wretches had already murdered him ! but then these rascals have not a den to which they may be tracked like tigers ! "
" no , " replied the reporter , " it is more probable that they wander at random , and it is their interest to rove about until the time when they will be masters of the island ! "
" the masters of the island ! " exclaimed the sailor ; " the masters of the island ! ... " he repeated , and his voice was choked , as if his throat was seized in an iron grasp .
then in a calmer tone , " do you know , captain harding , " said he , " what the ball is which i have rammed into my gun ? "
" no , pencroft ! "
" it is the ball that went through herbert 's chest , and i promise you it wo n't miss its mark ! "
but this just retaliation would not bring ayrton back to life , and from the examination of the footprints left in the ground , they must , alas ! conclude that all hopes of ever seeing him again must be abandoned .
that evening they encamped fourteen miles from granite house , and cyrus harding calculated that they could not be more than five miles from reptile point .
and indeed , the next day the extremity of the peninsula was reached , and the whole length of the forest had been traversed ; but there was nothing to indicate the retreat in which the convicts had taken refuge , nor that , no less secret , which sheltered the mysterious unknown .
the next day , the 18th of february , was devoted to the exploration of all that wooded region forming the shore from reptile end to falls river .
the trees , both by their height and their thick foliage , bore witness to the vegetative power of the soil , more astonishing here than in any other part of the island .
the most frequently occurring trees were knaries and eucalypti of gigantic dimensions .
but the colonists ' object was not simply to admire the magnificent vegetation .
no traces were found on the western coast , although they were carefully sought for .
no more footprints , no more broken branches , no more deserted camps .
" this does not surprise me , " said cyrus harding to his companions .
but , arriving on the shore , the convicts saw at once that they would discover no suitable retreat there , and it was then that , going northwards again , they came upon the corral . "
" where they have perhaps returned , " said pencroft .
" i do not think so , " answered the engineer , " for they would naturally suppose that our researches would be in that direction .
the corral is only a storehouse to them , and not a definitive encampment . "
" i am of cyrus ' opinion , " said the reporter , " and i think that it is among the spurs of mount franklin that the convicts will have made their lair . "
" then , captain , straight to the corral ! " cried pencroft .
" we must finish them off , and till now we have only lost time ! "
" no , my friend , " replied the engineer ; " you forget that we have a reason for wishing to know if the forests of the far west do not contain some habitation .
our exploration has a double object , pencroft .
if , on the one hand , we have to chastise crime , we have , on the other , an act of gratitude to perform . "
" that was well said , captain , " replied the sailor , " but , all the same , it is my opinion that we shall not find the gentleman until he pleases . "
and truly pencroft only expressed the opinion of all .
it was probable that the stranger 's retreat was not less mysterious than was he himself .
that evening the cart halted at the mouth of falls river .
the camp was organized as usual , and the customary precautions were taken for the night .
herbert , become again the healthy and vigorous lad he was before his illness , derived great benefit from this life in the open air , between the sea breezes and the vivifying air from the forests .
his place was no longer in the cart , but at the head of the troop .
the next day , the 19th of february , the colonists , leaving the shore , where , beyond the mouth , basalts of every shape were so picturesquely piled up , ascended the river by its left bank .
the road had been already partly cleared in their former excursions made from the corral to the west coast .
the settlers were now about six miles from mount franklin .
this plan was unanimously approved by the colonists , for they were impatient to regain entire possession of their island .
they made their way then along the narrow valley separating two of the largest spurs of mount franklin .
the trees , crowded on the river 's bank , became rare on the upper slopes of the mountain .
the ground was hilly and rough , very suitable for ambushes , and over which they did not venture without extreme precaution .
it was necessary to reconnoiter the corral , in order to ascertain if it was occupied .
to go there openly , in broad daylight , when the convicts were probably in ambush , would be to expose themselves , as poor herbert had done , to the firearms of the ruffians .
it was better , then , to wait until night came on .
however , gideon spilett wished without further delay to reconnoiter the approaches to the corral , and pencroft , who was quite out of patience , volunteered to accompany him .
" no , my friends , " said the engineer , " wait till night .
" but , captain-- " answered the sailor , little disposed to obey .
" i beg of you , pencroft , " said the engineer .
" very well ! " replied the sailor , who vented his anger in another way , by bestowing on the convicts the worst names in his maritime vocabulary .
the colonists remained , therefore , near the cart , and carefully watched the neighboring parts of the forest .
three hours passed thus .
the wind had fallen , and absolute silence reigned under the great trees .
the snapping of the smallest twig , a footstep on the dry leaves , the gliding of a body among the grass , would have been heard without difficulty .
at eight o'clock the day appeared far enough advanced for the reconnaissance to be made under favorable conditions .
gideon spilett declared himself ready to set out accompanied by pencroft .
top and jup were to remain with the engineer , herbert , and neb , for a bark or a cry at a wrong moment would give the alarm .
" do not be imprudent , " said harding to the reporter and pencroft , " you have not to gain possession of the corral , but only to find out whether it is occupied or not . "
" all right , " answered pencroft .
and the two departed .
under the trees , thanks to the thickness of their foliage , the obscurity rendered any object invisible beyond a radius of from thirty to forty feet .
the reporter and pencroft , halting at any suspicious sound , advanced with great caution .
they walked a little distance apart from each other so as to offer a less mark for a shot .
five minutes after leaving the cart , gideon spilett and pencroft arrived at the edge of the wood before the clearing beyond which rose the palisade .
they stopped .
a few straggling beams still fell on the field clear of trees .
thirty feet distant was the gate of the corral , which appeared to be closed .
this thirty feet , which it was necessary to cross from the wood to the palisade , constituted the dangerous zone , to borrow a ballistic term : in fact , one or more bullets fired from behind the palisade might knock over any one who ventured on to this zone .
gideon spilett and the sailor were not men to draw back , but they knew that any imprudence on their part , of which they would be the first victims , would fall afterwards on their companions .
if they themselves were killed , what would become of harding , neb , and herbert ?
but pencroft , excited at feeling himself so near the corral where he supposed the convicts had taken refuge , was about to press forward , when the reporter held him back with a grasp of iron .
" in a few minutes it will be quite dark , " whispered spilett in the sailor 's ear , " then will be the time to act . "
pencroft , convulsively clasping the butt - end of his gun , restrained his energies , and waited , swearing to himself .
mount franklin rose like an enormous screen before the western horizon , and night spread rapidly over all , as it does in regions of low latitudes .
now was the time .
the reporter and pencroft , since posting themselves on the edge of the wood , had not once lost sight of the palisade .
nevertheless , if the convicts were there , they must have posted one of their number to guard against any surprise .
spilett grasped his companion 's hand , and both crept towards the corral , their guns ready to fire .
they reached the gate without the darkness being illuminated by a single ray of light .
gideon spilett and pencroft listened .
not a sound could be heard inside the palisade .
the musmons and the goats , sleeping no doubt in their huts , in no way disturbed the calm of night .
the reporter and the sailor hearing nothing , asked themselves whether they had not better scale the palisades and penetrate into the corral .
it is true that the enterprise might succeed , but it might also fail .
now , if the convicts were suspecting nothing , if they knew nothing of the expedition against them , if , lastly , there now existed a chance of surprising them , ought this chance to be lost by inconsiderately attempting to cross the palisades ?
one thing was certain , that it was possible to reach the palisade without being seen , and also that it did not appear to be guarded .
this point settled , there was nothing to be done but to return to the cart , where they would consult .
pencroft probably agreed with this decision , for he followed the reporter without making any objection when the latter turned back to the wood .
in a few minutes the engineer was made acquainted with the state of affairs .
" well , " said he , after a little thought , " i now have reason to believe that the convicts are not in the corral . "
" we shall soon know , " said pencroft , " when we have scaled the palisade . "
" to the corral , my friends ! " said cyrus harding .
" shall we leave the cart in the wood ? " asked neb .
" no , " replied the engineer , " it is our wagon of ammunition and provisions , and , if necessary , it would serve as an entrenchment . "
" forward , then ! " said gideon spilett .
the cart emerged from the wood and began to roll noiselessly towards the palisade .
the darkness was now profound , the silence as complete as when pencroft and the reporter crept over the ground .
the thick grass completely muffled their footsteps .
the colonists held themselves ready to fire .
neb led top in a leash , to prevent him from bounding forward .
it was deserted .
neb remained at the onagers ' heads to hold them .
the engineer , the reporter , herbert , and pencroft , proceeded to the door , in order to ascertain if it was barricaded inside .
it was open ! " what do you say now ? " asked the engineer , turning to the sailor and spilett .
both were stupefied .
" i can swear , " said pencroft , " that this gate was shut just now ! "
the colonists now hesitated .
were the convicts in the corral when pencroft and the reporter made their reconnaissance ?
it could not be doubted , as the gate then closed could only have been opened by them .
were they still there , or had one of their number just gone out ?
all these questions presented themselves simultaneously to the minds of the colonists , but how could they be answered ?
at that moment , herbert , who had advanced a few steps into the enclosure , drew back hurriedly , and seized harding 's hand .
" what 's the matter ? " asked the engineer .
" a light ! "
" in the house ? "
" yes ! "
cyrus harding made up his mind rapidly .
" it is our only chance , " said he to his companions , " of finding the convicts collected in this house , suspecting nothing !
they are in our power !
the colonists crossed through the enclosure , holding their guns ready in their hands .
the cart had been left outside under the charge of jup and top , who had been prudently tied to it .
cyrus harding , pencroft , and gideon spilett on one side , herbert and neb on the other , going along by the palisade , surveyed the absolutely dark and deserted corral .
in a few moments they were near the closed door of the house .
on the bed lay the body of a man .
suddenly cyrus harding drew back , and in a hoarse voice,--"ayrton ! " he exclaimed .
immediately the door was forced rather than opened , and the colonists rushed into the room .
ayrton appeared to be asleep .
his countenance showed that he had long and cruelly suffered .
on his wrists and ankles could be seen great bruises .
harding bent over him .
" ayrton ! " cried the engineer , seizing the arm of the man whom he had just found again under such unexpected circumstances .
at this exclamation ayrton opened his eyes , and , gazing at harding , then at the others,--
" ayrton !
ayrton ! " repeated harding .
" where am i ? "
" in the house in the corral ! "
" alone ? "
" yes ! "
" but they will come back ! " cried ayrton .
" defend yourselves ! defend yourselves ! "
" spilett , " exclaimed the engineer , " we may be attacked at any moment .
in a moment the reporter and his two companions had crossed the corral and reached the gate of the palisade behind which top was heard growling sullenly .
the engineer , leaving ayrton for an instant , came out ready to fire .
herbert was at his side .
at that moment the moon appeared in the east , above the black curtain of the forest , and a white sheet of light spread over the interior of the enclosure .
the corral , with its clumps of trees , the little stream which watered it , its wide carpet of grass , was suddenly illuminated .
this was the cart entering the circle of light , and cyrus harding could hear the noise made by the door , as his companions shut it and fastened the interior bars .
but , at that moment , top , breaking loose , began to bark furiously and rush to the back of the corral , to the right of the house .
" be ready to fire , my friends ! " cried harding .
the colonists raised their pieces and waited the moment to fire .
top still barked , and jup , running towards the dog , uttered shrill cries .
the colonists followed him , and reached the borders of the little stream , shaded by large trees .
and there , in the bright moonlight , what did they see ?
five corpses , stretched on the bank !
they were those of the convicts who , four months previously , had landed on lincoln island !
chapter 13
how had it happened ? who had killed the convicts ?
was it ayrton ?
no , for a moment before he was dreading their return .
but ayrton was now in a profound stupor , from which it was no longer possible to rouse him .
the colonists , a prey to a thousand confused thoughts , under the influence of violent excitement , waited all night , without leaving ayrton 's house , or returning to the spot where lay the bodies of the convicts .
it was very probable that ayrton would not be able to throw any light on the circumstances under which the bodies had been found , since he himself was not aware that he was in the corral .
the next day ayrton awoke from his torpor , and his companions cordially manifested all the joy they felt , on seeing him again , almost safe and sound , after a hundred and four days separation .
ayrton then in a few words recounted what had happened , or , at least , as much as he knew .
the day after his arrival at the corral , on the 10th of last november , at nightfall , he was surprised by the convicts , who had scaled the palisade .
they bound and gagged him ; then he was led to a dark cavern , at the foot of mount franklin , where the convicts had taken refuge .
the wretches had no scruples as to murdering ayrton !
but from that moment ayrton was exposed to the importunities of his former accomplices .
ayrton remained firm .
the once convict , now repentant and pardoned , would rather die than betray his companions .
ayrton -- bound , gagged , and closely watched -- lived in this cave for four months .
nevertheless the convicts had discovered the corral a short time after their arrival in the island , and since then they had subsisted on ayrton 's stores , but did not live at the corral .
ayrton 's anxiety and despair may be imagined when he learned the news of herbert 's death .
the settlers were now only four , and , as it seemed , at the mercy of the convicts .
after this event , and during all the time that the colonists , detained by herbert 's illness , remained in the corral , the pirates did not leave their cavern , and even after they had pillaged the plateau of prospect heights , they did not think it prudent to abandon it .
the ill - treatment inflicted on ayrton was now redoubled .
matters remained thus until the third week of february .
the convicts , still watching for a favorable opportunity , rarely quitted their retreat , and only made a few hunting excursions , either to the interior of the island , or the south coast .
ayrton had no further news of his friends , and relinquished all hope of ever seeing them again .
at last , the unfortunate man , weakened by ill - treatment , fell into a prostration so profound that sight and hearing failed him .
from that moment , that is to say , since the last two days , he could give no information whatever of what had occurred .
" but , captain harding , " he added , " since i was imprisoned in that cavern , how is it that i find myself in the corral ? "
" how is it that the convicts are lying yonder dead , in the middle of the enclosure ? " answered the engineer .
" dead ! " cried ayrton , half rising from his bed , notwithstanding his weakness .
his companions supported him .
it was now broad daylight .
there , on the bank , in the position in which they had been stricken by death in its most instantaneous form , lay the corpses of the five convicts !
ayrton was astounded .
harding and his companions looked at him without uttering a word .
on a sign from the engineer , neb and pencroft examined the bodies , already stiffened by the cold .
they bore no apparent trace of any wound .
only , after carefully examining them , pencroft found on the forehead of one , on the chest of another , on the back of this one , on the shoulder of that , a little red spot , a sort of scarcely visible bruise , the cause of which it was impossible to conjecture .
" it is there that they have been struck ! " said cyrus harding .
" but with what weapon ? " cried the reporter .
" a weapon , lightning - like in its effects , and of which we have not the secret ! "
" and who has struck the blow ? " asked pencroft .
" the avenging power of the island , " replied harding , " he who brought you here , ayrton , whose influence has once more manifested itself , who does for us all that which we can not do for ourselves , and who , his will accomplished , conceals himself from us . "
" let us make search for him , then ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" yes , we will search for him , " answered harding , " but we shall not discover this powerful being who performs such wonders , until he pleases to call us to him ! "
this invisible protection , which rendered their own action unavailing , both irritated and piqued the engineer .
the relative inferiority which it proved was of a nature to wound a haughty spirit .
what would i not give could we repay him , by rendering him in our turn , although at the price of our lives , some signal service ! "
from this day , the thoughts of the inhabitants of lincoln island were solely occupied with the intended search .
everything incited them to discover the answer to this enigma , an answer which would only be the name of a man endowed with a truly inexplicable , and in some degree superhuman power .
in a few minutes , the settlers re - entered the house , where their influence soon restored to ayrton his moral and physical energy .
neb and pencroft carried the corpses of the convicts into the forest , some distance from the corral , and buried them deep in the ground .
ayrton was then made acquainted with the facts which had occurred during his seclusion .
he learned herbert 's adventures , and through what various trials the colonists had passed .
as to the settlers , they had despaired of ever seeing ayrton again , and had been convinced that the convicts had ruthlessly murdered him .
" and now , " said cyrus harding , as he ended his recital , " a duty remains for us to perform .
half of our task is accomplished , but although the convicts are no longer to be feared , it is not owing to ourselves that we are once more masters of the island . "
" well ! " answered gideon spilett , " let us search all this labyrinth of the spurs of mount franklin .
we will not leave a hollow , not a hole unexplored !
ah ! if ever a reporter found himself face to face with a mystery , it is i who now speak to you , my friends ! "
" and we will not return to granite house until we have found our benefactor , " said herbert .
" shall we stay at the corral ? " asked pencroft .
" we shall stay here , " answered harding . " provisions are abundant , and we are here in the very center of the circle we have to explore .
besides , if necessary , the cart will take us rapidly to granite house . "
" good ! " answered the sailor .
" only i have a remark to make . "
" what is it ? "
" a voyage ? " said gideon spilett .
" yes , to tabor island , " answered pencroft .
" it is necessary to carry a notice there to point out the position of our island and say that ayrton is here in case the scotch yacht should come to take him off .
who knows if it is not already too late ? "
" but , pencroft , " asked ayrton , " how do you intend to make this voyage ? "
" in the ' bonadventure . ' "
" the ' bonadventure ! ' " exclaimed ayrton . " she no longer exists . "
" my ' bonadventure ' exists no longer ! " shouted pencroft , bounding from his seat .
" no , " answered ayrton .
" the convicts discovered her in her little harbor only eight days ago , they put to sea in her-- "
" and ? " said pencroft , his heart beating .
" and not having bob harvey to steer her , they ran on the rocks , and the vessel went to pieces . "
" oh , the villains , the cutthroats , the infamous scoundrels ! " exclaimed pencroft .
" pencroft , " said herbert , taking the sailor 's hand , " we will build another ' bonadventure'--a larger one .
we have all the ironwork -- all the rigging of the brig at our disposal . "
" but do you know , " returned pencroft , " that it will take at least five or six months to build a vessel of from thirty to forty tons ? "
" we can take our time , " said the reporter , " and we must give up the voyage to tabor island for this year . "
" oh , my ' bonadventure ! ' my poor ' bonadventure ! ' " cried pencroft , almost broken - hearted at the destruction of the vessel of which he was so proud .
this settled , they now occupied themselves with bringing their researches to bear on the most secret parts of the island .
the exploration was commenced at daybreak on the 19th of february , and lasted an entire week .
the base of the mountain , with its spurs and their numberless ramifications , formed a labyrinth of valleys and elevations .
but so irregular was the formation of the valleys that cyrus harding was obliged to conduct the exploration in a strictly methodical manner .
the colonists first visited the valley opening to the south of the volcano , and which first received the waters of falls river .
there ayrton showed them the cavern where the convicts had taken refuge , and in which he had been imprisoned until his removal to the corral .
here the trees were fewer .
it could already be seen that , of the numerous valleys branching off at the base of mount franklin , three only were wooded and rich in pasturage like that of the corral , which bordered on the west on the falls river valley , and on the east on the red creek valley .
these two streams , which lower down became rivers by the absorption of several tributaries , were formed by all the springs of the mountain and thus caused the fertility of its southern part .
as to the mercy , it was more directly fed from ample springs concealed under the cover of jacamar wood , and it was by springs of this nature , spreading in a thousand streamlets , that the soil of the serpentine peninsula was watered .
but the settlers had already explored them , and in no part had they discovered the presence of man .
was it then in the depths of those barren gorges , in the midst of the piles of rock , in the rugged northern ravines , among the streams of lava , that this dwelling and its occupant would be found ?
the northern part of mount franklin was at its base composed solely of two valleys , wide , not very deep , without any appearance of vegetation , strewn with masses of rock , paved with lava , and varied with great blocks of mineral .
this region required a long and careful exploration .
it contained a thousand cavities , comfortless no doubt , but perfectly concealed and difficult of access .
the colonists even visited dark tunnels , dating from the volcanic period , still black from the passage of the fire , and penetrated into the depths of the mountain .
it did not appear that the foot of man had ever before trodden these ancient passages , or that his arm had ever displaced one of these blocks , which remained as the volcano had cast them up above the waters , at the time of the submersion of the island .
however , although these passages appeared to be absolutely deserted , and the obscurity was complete , cyrus harding was obliged to confess that absolute silence did not reign there .
on arriving at the end of one of these gloomy caverns , extending several hundred feet into the interior of the mountain , he was surprised to hear a deep rumbling noise , increased in intensity by the sonorousness of the rocks .
gideon spilett , who accompanied him , also heard these distant mutterings , which indicated a revivification of the subterranean fires .
several times both listened , and they agreed that some chemical process was taking place in the bowels of the earth .
" then the volcano is not totally extinct ? " said the reporter .
" it is possible that since our exploration of the crater , " replied cyrus harding , " some change has occurred .
any volcano , although considered extinct , may evidently again burst forth . "
" but if an eruption of mount franklin occurred , " asked spilett , " would there not be some danger to lincoln island ? "
" i do not think so , " answered the reporter .
" the crater , that is to say , the safety - valve , exists , and the overflow of smoke and lava , would escape , as it did formerly , by this customary outlet . "
" unless the lava opened a new way for itself towards the fertile parts of the island ! "
" and why , my dear spilett , " answered cyrus harding , " should it not follow the road naturally traced out for it ? "
" well , volcanoes are capricious , " returned the reporter .
" notice , " answered the engineer , " that the inclination of mount franklin favors the flow of water towards the valleys which we are exploring just now .
to turn aside this flow , an earthquake would be necessary to change the mountain 's center of gravity . "
" but an earthquake is always to be feared at these times , " observed gideon spilett .
" always , " replied the engineer , " especially when the subterranean forces begin to awake , as they risk meeting with some obstruction , after a long rest .
but we could not prevent it , could we ?
at any rate , even if it should occur , i do not think prospect heights would be seriously threatened .
between them and the mountain , the ground is considerably depressed , and if the lava should ever take a course towards the lake , it would be cast on the downs and the neighboring parts of shark gulf . "
" we have not yet seen any smoke at the top of the mountain , to indicate an approaching eruption , " said gideon spilett .
" no , " answered harding , " not a vapor escapes from the crater , for it was only yesterday that i attentively surveyed the summit .
but it is probable that at the lower part of the chimney , time may have accumulated rocks , cinders , hardened lava , and that this valve of which i spoke , may at any time become overcharged .
but at the first serious effort , every obstacle will disappear , and you may be certain , my dear spilett , that neither the island , which is the boiler , nor the volcano , which is the chimney , will burst under the pressure of gas .
nevertheless , i repeat , it would be better that there should not be an eruption . "
" and yet we are not mistaken , " remarked the reporter .
" mutterings can be distinctly heard in the very bowels of the volcano ! "
cyrus harding and spilett , on coming out , rejoined their companions , to whom they made known the state of affairs .
let him try , if he likes !
he will find his master ! "
" who ? " asked neb .
" our good genius , neb , our good genius , who will shut his mouth for him , if he so much as pretends to open it ! "
from the 19th to the 20th of february the circle of investigation was extended to all the northern region of lincoln island , whose most secret nooks were explored .
it was explored thus to the very summit of the truncated cone terminating the first row of rocks , then to the upper ridge of the enormous hat , at the bottom of which opened the crater .
they did more ; they visited the gulf , now extinct , but in whose depths the rumbling could be distinctly heard .
their investigations were then directed to the downs .
they carefully examined the high lava - cliffs of shark gulf from the base to the crest , although it was extremely difficult to reach even the level of the gulf .
no one!--nothing !
indeed , in these three words was summed up so much fatigue uselessly expended , so much energy producing no results , that somewhat of anger mingled with the discomfiture of cyrus harding and his companions .
it was now time to think of returning , for these researches could not be prolonged indefinitely .
the colonists were certainly right in believing that the mysterious being did not reside on the surface of the island , and the wildest fancies haunted their excited imaginations .
pencroft and neb , particularly , were not contented with the mystery , but allowed their imaginations to wander into the domain of the supernatural .
on the 25th of february the colonists re - entered granite house , and by means of the double cord , carried by an arrow to the threshold of the door , they re - established communication between their habitation and the ground .
a month later they commemorated , on the 25th of march , the third anniversary of their arrival on lincoln island .
chapter 14
three years had passed away since the escape of the prisoners from richmond , and how often during those three years had they spoken of their country , always present in their thoughts !
they had no doubt that the civil war was at an end , and to them it appeared impossible that the just cause of the north had not triumphed .
but what had been the incidents of this terrible war ?
how much blood had it not cost ?
how many of their friends must have fallen in the struggle ?
" unless , " said pencroft , " our good genius , himself provides us with the means of returning to our country . "
and , really , had any one told pencroft and neb that a ship of 300 tons was waiting for them in shark gulf or at port balloon , they would not even have made a gesture of surprise .
in their state of mind nothing appeared improbable .
but cyrus harding , less confident , advised them to confine themselves to fact , and more especially so with regard to the building of a vessel -- a really urgent work , since it was for the purpose of depositing , as soon as possible , at tabor island a document indicating ayrton 's new residence .
" we have time to get everything ready for the fine season , " remarked the engineer , who was consulting with pencroft about these matters .
will it not then be best to build a ship which , if necessary , could take us either to the polynesian archipelago or to new zealand ?
what do you think ? "
" i think , captain , " answered the sailor ; " i think that you are as capable of building a large vessel as a small one .
neither the wood nor the tools are wanting .
" and how many months would be required to build a vessel of from 250 to 300 tons ? " asked harding .
" seven or eight months at least , " replied pencroft .
" but it must not be forgotten that winter is drawing near , and that in severe frost wood is difficult to work .
we must calculate on several weeks delay , and if our vessel is ready by next november we may think ourselves very lucky . "
" well , " replied cyrus harding , " that will be exactly the most favorable time for undertaking a voyage of any importance , either to tabor island or to a more distant land . "
" so it will , captain , " answered the sailor .
" make out your plans then ; the workmen are ready , and i imagine that ayrton can lend us a good helping hand . "
the colonists , having been consulted , approved the engineer 's plan , and it was , indeed , the best thing to be done .
it is true that the construction of a ship of from two to three hundred tons would be great labor , but the colonists had confidence in themselves , justified by their previous success .
cyrus harding then busied himself in drawing the plan of the vessel and making the model .
during this time his companions employed themselves in felling and carting trees to furnish the ribs , timbers , and planks .
the forest of the far west supplied the best oaks and elms .
they took advantage of the opening already made on their last excursion to form a practicable road , which they named the far west road , and the trees were carried to the chimneys , where the dockyard was established .
as to the road in question , the choice of trees had rendered its direction somewhat capricious , but at the same time it facilitated the access to a large part of the serpentine peninsula .
the carpenters , therefore , worked vigorously during the month of april , which was troubled only by a few equinoctial gales of some violence .
master jup aided them dexterously , either by climbing to the top of a tree to fasten the ropes or by lending his stout shoulders to carry the lopped trunks .
all this timber was piled up under a large shed , built near the chimneys , and there awaited the time for use .
the month of april was tolerably fine , as october often is in the northern zone .
at the same time other work was actively continued , and soon all trace of devastation disappeared from the plateau of prospect heights .
the mill was rebuilt , and new buildings rose in the poultry - yard .
it had appeared necessary to enlarge their dimensions , for the feathered population had increased considerably .
the stable now contained five onagers , four of which were well broken , and allowed themselves to be either driven or ridden , and a little colt .
the colonists divided their work , and their arms never tired .
then who could have enjoyed better health than these workers , and what good humor enlivened the evenings in granite house as they formed a thousand plans for the future !
nevertheless he was still sad and reserved , and joined more in the work than in the pleasures of his companions .
in the meanwhile the corral was not abandoned .
every other day one of the settlers , driving the cart or mounted on an onager , went to look after the flock of musmons and goats and bring back the supply of milk required by neb .
these excursions at the same time afforded opportunities for hunting .
the telegraphic wire between the corral and granite house had of course been repaired , and it was worked whenever one or other of the settlers was at the corral and found it necessary to spend the night there .
besides , the island was safe now and no attacks were to be feared , at any rate from men .
it was possible that companions or accomplices of bob harvey had been in the secret of his plans , and might be tempted to imitate him .
when they went to the corral they examined the sea to the west with no less attention , and by climbing the spur their gaze extended over a large section of the western horizon .
nothing suspicious was discerned , but still it was necessary for them to be on their guard .
the engineer one evening imparted to his friends a plan which he had conceived for fortifying the corral .
it appeared prudent to him to heighten the palisade and to flank it with a sort of blockhouse , which , if necessary , the settlers could hold against the enemy .
the keel , of good oak , measured 110 feet in length , this allowing a width of five - and - twenty feet to the midship beam .
but this was all the carpenters could do before the arrival of the frosts and bad weather .
during the following week they fixed the first of the stern timbers , but were then obliged to suspend work .
the engineer was somewhat uneasy on account of the dockyard shed -- which besides , he could not have established in any other place near to granite house -- for the islet only imperfectly sheltered the shore from the fury of the open sea , and in great storms the waves beat against the very foot of the granite cliff .
but , very fortunately , these fears were not realized .
pencroft and ayrton , the most zealous workmen at the new vessel , pursued their labor as long as they could .
they were not men to mind the wind tearing at their hair , nor the rain wetting them to the skin , and a blow from a hammer is worth just as much in bad as in fine weather .
but when a severe frost succeeded this wet period , the wood , its fibers acquiring the hardness of iron , became extremely difficult to work , and about the 10th of june shipbuilding was obliged to be entirely discontinued .
cyrus harding and his companions had not omitted to observe how severe was the temperature during the winters of lincoln island .
the cold was comparable to that experienced in the states of new england , situated at almost the same distance from the equator .
in the northern hemisphere , or at any rate in the part occupied by british america and the north of the united states , this phenomenon is explained by the flat conformation of the territories bordering on the pole , and on which there is no intumescence of the soil to oppose any obstacle to the north winds ; here , in lincoln island , this explanation would not suffice .
" it has even been observed , " remarked harding one day to his companions , " that in equal latitudes the islands and coast regions are less tried by the cold than inland countries .
" but then , captain harding , " asked herbert , " why does lincoln island appear to escape the common law ? "
" that is difficult to explain , " answered the engineer .
" however , i should be disposed to conjecture that this peculiarity results from the situation of the island in the southern hemisphere , which , as you know , my boy , is colder than the northern hemisphere . "
" yes , " said herbert , " and icebergs are met with in lower latitudes in the south than in the north of the pacific . "
" that is true , " remarked pencroft , " and when i have been serving on board whalers i have seen icebergs off cape horn . "
" the severe cold experienced in lincoln island , " said gideon spilett , " may then perhaps be explained by the presence of floes or icebergs comparatively near to lincoln island . "
" your opinion is very admissible indeed , my dear spilett , " answered cyrus harding , " and it is evidently to the proximity of icebergs that we owe our rigorous winters .
i would draw your attention also to an entirely physical cause , which renders the southern colder than the northern hemisphere .
in fact , since the sun is nearer to this hemisphere during the summer , it is necessarily more distant during the winter .
this explains then the excess of temperature in the two seasons , for , if we find the winters very cold in lincoln island , we must not forget that the summers here , on the contrary , are very hot . "
" but why , if you please , captain , " asked pencroft , knitting his brows , " why should our hemisphere , as you say , be so badly divided ?
it is n't just , that ! "
" friend pencroft , " answered the engineer , laughing , " whether just or not , we must submit to it , and here lies the reason for this peculiarity .
the earth does not describe a circle around the sun , but an ellipse , as it must by the laws of rational mechanics .
now , the earth occupies one of the foci of the ellipse , and so at one point in its course is at its apogee , that is , at its farthest from the sun , and at another point it is at its perigee , or nearest to the sun .
now it happens that it is during the winter of the southern countries that it is at its most distant point from the sun , and consequently , in a situation for those regions to feel the greatest cold .
nothing can be done to prevent that , and men , pencroft , however learned they may be , can never change anything of the cosmographical order established by god himself . "
what a big book , captain , might be made with all that is known ! "
" and what a much bigger book still with all that is not known ! " answered harding .
at last , for one reason or another , the month of june brought the cold with its accustomed intensity , and the settlers were often confined to granite house .
ah ! how wearisome this imprisonment was to them , and more particularly to gideon spilett .
decidedly the thing that is most essential to my happiness is the knowing every morning what has happened the day before in other places than this ! "
neb began to laugh .
" ' pon my word , " he replied , " the only thing i think about is my daily work ! "
the truth was that indoors as well as out there was no want of work .
the colony of lincoln island was now at its highest point of prosperity , achieved by three years of continued hard work .
the destruction of the brig had been a new source of riches .
it had not even been necessary to resort again to the manufacture of the coarse felt materials .
though the colonists had suffered from cold during their first winter , the bad season might now come without their having any reason to dread its severity .
linen was plentiful also , and besides , they kept it with extreme care .
besides , they did not wash more than four times a year , as was done by families in the olden times , and it may be added , that pencroft and gideon spilett , while waiting for the postman to bring him his newspaper , distinguished themselves as washermen .
but then , what splendid fires blazed continually on the hearths of granite house , the smoke marking the granite wall with long , zebra - like streaks !
men and animals were all well .
but what a servant he was , clever , zealous , indefatigable , not indiscreet , not talkative , and he might have been with reason proposed as a model for all his biped brothers in the old and new worlds !
" as for that , " said pencroft , " when one has four hands at one 's service , of course one 's work ought to be done so much the better ! "
and indeed the intelligent creature did it well .
it is true that it would have been superfluous , for no incident occurred to put the colonists to any painful trial .
cyrus harding even observed that if by chance the communication between the unknown and the tenants of granite house had ever been established through the granite , and if top 's instinct had as it were felt it , there was no further sign of it during this period .
the dog 's growling had entirely ceased , as well as the uneasiness of the orang .
the two friends -- for they were such -- no longer prowled round the opening of the inner well , nor did they bark or whine in that singular way which from the first the engineer had noticed .
could he be certain that some conjuncture would not occur which would bring the mysterious personage on the scene ? who could tell what the future might have in reserve ?
at last the winter was ended , but an event , the consequences of which might be serious occurred in the first days of the returning spring .
on the 7th of september , cyrus harding , having observed the crater , saw smoke curling round the summit of the mountain , its first vapors rising in the air .
the colonists , warned by the engineer , left their work and gazed in silence at the summit of mount franklin .
the volcano had awoke , and the vapor had penetrated the mineral layer heaped at the bottom of the crater .
but would the subterranean fires provoke any violent eruption ?
this was an event which could not be foreseen .
however , even while admitting the possibility of an eruption , it was not probable that the whole of lincoln island would suffer from it .
the flow of volcanic matter is not always disastrous , and the island had already undergone this trial , as was shown by the streams of lava hardened on the northern slopes of the mountain .
besides , from the shape of the crater -- the opening broken in the upper edge -- the matter would be thrown to the side opposite the fertile regions of the island .
however , the past did not necessarily answer for the future .
cyrus harding explained these things to his companions , and , without exaggerating the state of things , he told them all the pros and cons .
after all , they could not prevent it .
it did not appear likely that granite house would be threatened unless the ground was shaken by an earthquake .
but the corral would be in great danger should a new crater open in the southern side of mount franklin .
from that day the smoke never disappeared from the top of the mountain , and it could even be perceived that it increased in height and thickness , without any flame mingling in its heavy volumes .
the phenomenon was still concentrated in the lower part of the central crater .
however , with the fine days work had been continued .
the building of the vessel was hastened as much as possible , and , by means of the waterfall on the shore , cyrus harding managed to establish an hydraulic sawmill , which rapidly cut up the trunks of trees into planks and joists .
the mechanism of this apparatus was as simple as those used in the rustic sawmills of norway .
a first horizontal movement to move the piece of wood , a second vertical movement to move the saw -- this was all that was wanted ; and the engineer succeeded by means of a wheel , two cylinders , and pulleys properly arranged .
towards the end of the month of september the skeleton of the vessel , which was to be rigged as a schooner , lay in the dockyard .
the ribs were almost entirely completed , and , all the timbers having been sustained by a provisional band , the shape of the vessel could already be seen .
very fortunately , the iron work of the pirate brig had been saved after the explosion .
from the planks and injured ribs pencroft and ayrton had extracted the bolts and a large quantity of copper nails .
it was so much work saved for the smiths , but the carpenters had much to do .
this work finished , every moment was devoted to finishing the schooner .
when night came the workmen were really quite exhausted .
so as not to lose any time they had changed the hours for their meals ; they dined at twelve o'clock , and only had their supper when daylight failed them .
they then ascended to granite house , when they were always ready to go to bed .
sometimes , however , when the conversation bore on some interesting subject the hour for sleep was delayed for a time .
the colonists then spoke of the future , and talked willingly of the changes which a voyage in the schooner to inhabited lands would make in their situation .
but always , in the midst of these plans , prevailed the thought of a subsequent return to lincoln island .
never would they abandon this colony , founded with so much labor and with such success , and to which a communication with america would afford a fresh impetus .
pencroft and neb especially hoped to end their days there .
" that was made up long ago , my boy , " answered pencroft . " i shall expect you .
you will bring me your wife and children , and i shall make jolly chaps of your youngsters ! "
" that 's agreed , " replied herbert , laughing and blushing at the same time .
" and you , captain harding , " resumed pencroft enthusiastically , " you will be still the governor of the island !
ah , how many inhabitants could it support ?
ten thousand at least ! "
they talked in this way , allowing pencroft to run on , and at last the reporter actually started a newspaper -- the new lincoln herald ! so is man 's heart .
the desire to perform a work which will endure , which will survive him , is the origin of his superiority over all other living creatures here below .
after that , who knows if jup and top had not themselves their little dream of the future .
ayrton silently said to himself that he would like to see lord glenarvan again and show himself to all restored .
one evening , on the 15th of october , the conversation was prolonged later than usual .
all were there , cyrus harding , gideon spilett , herbert , ayrton , pencroft , neb .
therefore none of the colonists were at the corral .
cyrus harding rose .
his companions stared at each other , scarcely believing their ears .
" what does that mean ? " cried neb .
" was it the devil who rang it ? "
no one answered .
" the weather is stormy , " observed herbert .
" might not its influence of electricity-- "
herbert did not finish his phrase .
the engineer , towards whom all eyes were turned , shook his head negatively .
" we must wait , " said gideon spilett .
" if it is a signal , whoever it may be who has made it , he will renew it . "
" but who do you think it is ? " cried neb .
" who ? " answered pencroft , " but he-- "
the sailor 's sentence was cut short by a new tinkle of the bell .
harding went to the apparatus , and sent this question to the corral:-- " what do you want ? "
a few moments later the needle , moving on the alphabetic dial , gave this reply to the tenants of granite house:--
" come to the corral immediately . "
" at last ! " exclaimed harding .
yes !
without having uttered a word , in a few moments they had left granite house , and were standing on the beach .
jup and top alone were left behind .
they could do without them .
the night was black .
the new moon had disappeared at the same time as the sun .
as herbert had observed , great stormy clouds formed a lowering and heavy vault , preventing any star rays .
a few lightning flashes , reflections from a distant storm , illuminated the horizon .
it was possible that a few hours later the thunder would roll over the island itself .
the night was very threatening .
but however deep the darkness was , it would not prevent them from finding the familiar road to the corral .
they ascended the left bank of the mercy , reached the plateau , passed the bridge over creek glycerine , and advanced through the forest .
they walked at a good pace , a prey to the liveliest emotions .
there was no doubt but that they were now going to learn the long - searched - for answer to the enigma , the name of that mysterious being , so deeply concerned in their life , so generous in his influence , so powerful in his action !
every one , wrapped up in his own reflections , pressed forward .
under the arch of trees the darkness was such that even the edge of the road could not be seen .
during the first quarter of an hour the silence was only interrupted by this remark from pencroft:--
" we ought to have brought a torch . "
and by this reply from the engineer:--
" we shall find one at the corral . "
at that moment sheets of lightning spread over the island and illumined the dark trees .
the flashes gradually became brighter and more rapid .
the colonists proceeded as if they were urged onwards by some irresistible force .
at ten o'clock a vivid flash showed them the palisade , and as they reached the gate the storm burst forth with tremendous fury .
in a minute the corral was crossed , and harding stood before the hut .
probably the house was occupied by the stranger , since it was from thence that the telegram had been sent .
however , no light shone through the window .
the engineer knocked at the door .
no answer .
cyrus harding opened the door , and the settlers entered the room , which was perfectly dark .
a light was struck by neb , and in a few moments the lantern was lighted and the light thrown into every corner of the room .
there was no one there .
everything was in the state in which it had been left .
" have we been deceived by an illusion ? " murmured cyrus harding .
no ! that was not possible !
the telegram had clearly said,-- " come to the corral immediately . "
they approached the table specially devoted to the use of the wire .
everything was in order -- the pile on the box containing it , as well as all the apparatus .
" who came here the last time ? " asked the engineer .
" i did , captain , " answered ayrton .
" and that was-- "
" four days ago . "
" ah ! a note ! " cried herbert , pointing to a paper lying on the table .
on this paper were written these words in english:-- " follow the new wire . "
" forward ! " cried harding , who understood that the despatch had not been sent from the corral , but from the mysterious retreat , communicating directly with granite house by means of a supplementary wire joined to the old one .
neb took the lighted lantern , and all left the corral .
the summit of the volcano , with its plume of vapor , could be seen by occasional flashes .
" there it is ! " said he .
this wire lay along the ground , and was surrounded with an isolating substance like a submarine cable , so as to assure the free transmission of the current .
it appeared to pass through the wood and the southern spurs of the mountain , and consequently it ran towards the west .
" follow it ! " said cyrus harding .
the thunder continued to roar with such violence that not a word could be heard .
however , there was no occasion for speaking , but to get forward as fast as possible .
cyrus harding and his companions then climbed the spur rising between the corral valley and that of falls river , which they crossed at its narrowest part .
the wire , sometimes stretched over the lower branches of the trees , sometimes lying on the ground , guided them surely .
the engineer had supposed that the wire would perhaps stop at the bottom of the valley , and that the stranger 's retreat would be there .
nothing of the sort .
they were obliged to ascend the south - western spur , and re - descend on that arid plateau terminated by the strangely - wild basalt cliff .
the sky was literally on fire .
harding calculated that they had gone a mile and a half from the corral .
at this point the wire entered among the rocks , following the steep side of a narrow ravine .
thus they almost unconsciously descended this ravine , which even in broad daylight would have been considered impracticable .
the stones rolled and sparkled like fiery balls when they crossed through the gleams of light .
the colonists had reached the bottom of the basalt cliff .
they had not gone a hundred paces when the ridge by a moderate incline sloped down to the level of the sea .
the engineer seized the wire and found that it disappeared beneath the waves .
a cry of disappointment , almost a cry of despair , escaped them !
must they then plunge beneath the water and seek there for some submarine cavern ?
in their excited state they would not have hesitated to do it .
the engineer stopped them .
he led his companions to a hollow in the rocks , and there--
" the tide is high .
at low water the way will be open . "
" but what can make you think- " asked pencroft .
cyrus harding spoke in a tone of such thorough conviction that no objection was raised .
there was some time to wait .
the colonists remained silently crouching in a deep hollow . rain now began to fall in torrents .
the thunder was re - echoed among the rocks with a grand sonorousness .
the colonists ' emotion was great .
a thousand strange and extraordinary ideas crossed their brains , and they expected some grand and superhuman apparition , which alone could come up to the notion they had formed of the mysterious genius of the island .
there the wire , bending at a right angle , entered the yawning gulf .
cyrus harding returned to his companions , and said simply,--
" in an hour the opening will be practicable . "
" it is there , then ? " said pencroft .
" did you doubt it ? " returned harding .
" but this cavern must be filled with water to a certain height , " observed herbert .
an hour passed .
all climbed down through the rain to the level of the sea .
it was like the arch of a bridge , under which rushed the foaming water .
it was a boat , moored to some interior projection of the cave .
" jump in ! " said harding .
in a moment the settlers were in the boat .
the elliptical roof , under which the boat at first passed , suddenly rose ; but the darkness was too deep , and the light of the lantern too slight , for either the extent , length , height , or depth of the cave to be ascertained .
solemn silence reigned in this basaltic cavern .
not a sound could penetrate into it , even the thunder peals could not pierce its thick sides .
such immense caves exist in various parts of the world , natural crypts dating from the geological epoch of the globe .
some are filled by the sea ; others contain entire lakes in their sides .
such is fingal 's cave , in the island of staffa , one of the hebrides ; such are the caves of morgat , in the bay of douarnenez , in brittany , the caves of bonifacio , in corsica , those of lyse - fjord , in norway ; such are the immense mammoth caverns in kentucky , 500 feet in height , and more than twenty miles in length !
in many parts of the globe , nature has excavated these caverns , and preserved them for the admiration of man .
did the cavern which the settlers were now exploring extend to the center of the island ?
" more to the right ! " he commanded .
the boat , altering its course , came up alongside the right wall .
the engineer wished to see if the wire still ran along the side .
the wire was there fastened to the rock .
" forward ! " said harding .
and the two oars , plunging into the dark waters , urged the boat onwards .
on they went for another quarter of an hour , and a distance of half - a - mile must have been cleared from the mouth of the cave , when harding 's voice was again heard .
" stop ! " said he .
at a height of a hundred feet rose the vaulted roof , supported on basalt shafts .
irregular arches , strange moldings , appeared on the columns erected by nature in thousands from the first epochs of the formation of the globe .
the basalt pillars , fitted one into the other , measured from forty to fifty feet in height , and the water , calm in spite of the tumult outside , washed their base .
by reflection the water reproduced the brilliant sparkles , so that the boat appeared to be floating between two glittering zones .
they could not be mistaken in the nature of the irradiation thrown from the glowing nucleus , whose clear rays were shattered by all the angles , all the projections of the cavern .
this light proceeded from an electric source , and its white color betrayed its origin .
it was the sun of this cave , and it filled it entirely .
at a sign from cyrus harding the oars again plunged into the water , causing a regular shower of gems , and the boat was urged forward towards the light , which was now not more than half a cable 's length distant .
at this place the breadth of the sheet of water measured nearly 350 feet , and beyond the dazzling center could be seen an enormous basaltic wall , blocking up any issue on that side .
the cavern widened here considerably , the sea forming a little lake .
in the center of the lake a long cigar - shaped object floated on the surface of the water , silent , motionless .
the brilliancy which issued from it escaped from its sides as from two kilns heated to a white heat .
this apparatus , similar in shape to an enormous whale , was about 250 feet long , and rose about ten or twelve above the water .
the boat slowly approached it , cyrus harding stood up in the bows .
then , all at once , seizing the reporter 's arm,--
it can only be he ! " he cried , " he!-- "
then , falling back on the seat , he murmured a name which gideon spilett alone could hear .
the reporter evidently knew this name , for it had a wonderful effect upon him , and he answered in a hoarse voice,--
" he ! an outlawed man ! "
" he ! " said harding .
harding and his companions mounted on the platform .
an open hatchway was there .
a richly - ornamented room , quickly traversed by the colonists , was joined to a library , over which a luminous ceiling shed a flood of light .
at the end of the library a large door , also shut , was opened by the engineer .
an immense saloon -- a sort of museum , in which were heaped up , with all the treasures of the mineral world , works of art , marvels of industry -- appeared before the eyes of the colonists , who almost thought themselves suddenly transported into a land of enchantment .
stretched on a rich sofa they saw a man , who did not appear to notice their presence .
then harding raised his voice , and to the extreme surprise of his companions , he uttered these words,--
" captain nemo , you asked for us ! we are here.-- "
at these words the reclining figure rose , and the electric light fell upon his countenance ; a magnificent head , the forehead high , the glance commanding , beard white , hair abundant and falling over the shoulders .
his hand rested upon the cushion of the divan from which he had just risen . he appeared perfectly calm . it was evident that his strength had been gradually undermined by illness , but his voice seemed yet powerful , as he said in english , and in a tone which evinced extreme surprise,--
" sir , i have no name . "
" nevertheless , i know you ! " replied cyrus harding .
captain nemo fixed his penetrating gaze upon the engineer , as though he were about to annihilate him .
then , falling back amid the pillows of the divan,--
" after all , what matters now ? " he murmured ; " i am dying ! "
cyrus harding drew near the captain , and gideon spilett took his hand -- it was of a feverish heat .
ayrton , pencroft , herbert , and neb stood respectfully apart in an angle of the magnificent saloon , whose atmosphere was saturated with the electric fluid .
meanwhile captain nemo withdrew his hand , and motioned the engineer and the reporter to be seated .
all regarded him with profound emotion .
their eyes beheld a man only , and a man at the point of death , where pencroft and neb had expected to find an almost supernatural being !
but how happened it that cyrus harding had recognized captain nemo ? why had the latter so suddenly risen on hearing this name uttered , a name which he had believed known to none?--
the captain had resumed his position on the divan , and leaning on his arm , he regarded the engineer , seated near him .
" you know the name i formerly bore , sir ? " he asked .
" i do , " answered cyrus harding , " and also that of this wonderful submarine vessel-- "
" the ' nautilus ' ? " said the captain , with a faint smile .
" the ' nautilus . ' "
" but do you -- do you know who i am ? "
" it is nevertheless many years since i have held any communication with the inhabited world ; three long years have i passed in the depth of the sea , the only place where i have found liberty !
who then can have betrayed my secret ? "
" a man who was bound to you by no tie , captain nemo , and who , consequently , can not be accused of treachery . "
" the frenchman who was cast on board my vessel by chance sixteen years since ? "
" the same . "
" he and his two companions did not then perish in the maelstrom , in the midst of which the ' nautilus ' was struggling ? "
" they escaped , and a book has appeared under the title of ' twenty thousand leagues under the sea , ' which contains your history . "
" the history of a few months only of my life ! " interrupted the captain impetuously .
" it is true , " answered cyrus harding , " but a few months of that strange life have sufficed to make you known . "
" as a great criminal , doubtless ! " said captain nemo , a haughty smile curling his lips .
" yes , a rebel , perhaps an outlaw against humanity ! "
the engineer was silent .
" well , sir ? "
" it is not for me to judge you , captain nemo , " answered cyrus harding , " at any rate as regards your past life .
" it is i , " answered the captain simply .
the engineer and the reporter rose .
their companions had drawn near , and the gratitude with which their hearts were charged was about to express itself in their gestures and words . captain nemo stopped them by a sign , and in a voice which betrayed more emotion than he doubtless intended to show .
" wait till you have heard all , " he said .
and the captain , in a few concise sentences , ran over the events of his life .
his narrative was short , yet he was obliged to summon up his whole remaining energy to arrive at the end .
several times cyrus harding entreated him to repose for a while , but he shook his head as a man to whom the morrow may never come , and when the reporter offered his assistance,--
" it is useless , " he said ; " my hours are numbered . "
captain nemo was an indian , the prince dakkar , son of a rajah of the then independent territory of bundelkund .
he traveled over the whole of europe .
his rank and fortune caused him to be everywhere sought after ; but the pleasures of the world had for him no attractions .
their ignorance and gross superstition made them the facile tools of their designing chiefs .
a price was set upon his head , but he managed to escape from his pursuers .
civilization never recedes ; the law of necessity ever forces it onwards .
the sepoys were vanquished , and the land of the rajahs of old fell again under the rule of england .
prince dakkar , unable to find that death he courted , returned to the mountain fastnesses of bundelkund .
where , then , did he seek that liberty denied him upon the inhabited earth ?
under the waves , in the depths of the ocean , where none could follow .
the warrior became the man of science .
upon a deserted island of the pacific he established his dockyard , and there a submarine vessel was constructed from his designs .
by methods which will at some future day be revealed he had rendered subservient the illimitable forces of electricity , which , extracted from inexhaustible sources , was employed for all the requirements of his floating equipage , as a moving , lighting , and heating agent .
he named his submarine vessel the " nautilus , " called himself simply captain nemo , and disappeared beneath the seas .
during many years this strange being visited every ocean , from pole to pole .
outcast of the inhabited earth in these unknown worlds he gathered incalculable treasures .
the millions lost in the bay of vigo , in 1702 , by the galleons of spain , furnished him with a mine of inexhaustible riches which he devoted always , anonymously , in favor of those nations who fought for the independence of their country .
captain nemo learned from this professor that the " nautilus , " taken now for a gigantic mammal of the whale species , now for a submarine vessel carrying a crew of pirates , was sought for in every sea .
he might have returned these three men to the ocean , from whence chance had brought them in contact with his mysterious existence .
instead of doing this he kept them prisoners , and during seven months they were enabled to behold all the wonders of a voyage of twenty thousand leagues under the sea .
one day , the 22nd of june , 1867 , these three men , who knew nothing of the past history of captain nemo , succeeded in escaping in one of the " nautilus 's " boats .
but as at this time the " nautilus " was drawn into the vortex of the maelstrom , off the coast of norway , the captain naturally believed that the fugitives , engulfed in that frightful whirlpool , found their death at the bottom of the abyss .
he was unaware that the frenchman and his two companions had been miraculously cast on shore , that the fishermen of the lofoten islands had rendered them assistance , and that the professor , on his return to france , had published that work in which seven months of the strange and eventful navigation of the " nautilus " were narrated and exposed to the curiosity of the public .
for a long time after this , captain nemo continued to live thus , traversing every sea .
but one by one his companions died , and found their last resting - place in their cemetery of coral , in the bed of the pacific .
he was now sixty years of age .
although alone , he succeeded in navigating the " nautilus " towards one of those submarine caverns which had sometimes served him as a harbor .
one of these ports was hollowed beneath lincoln island , and at this moment furnished an asylum to the " nautilus . "
the captain had now remained there six years , navigating the ocean no longer , but awaiting death , and that moment when he should rejoin his former companions , when by chance he observed the descent of the balloon which carried the prisoners of the confederates .
clad in his diving dress he was walking beneath the water at a few cables ' length from the shore of the island , when the engineer had been thrown into the sea .
he observed these men thrown without resources upon a desert island , but had no wish to be himself discovered by them .
by means of the diving dress he could easily reach the well in the interior of granite house , and climbing by the projections of rock to its upper orifice he heard the colonists as they recounted the past , and studied the present and future .
he learned from them the tremendous conflict of america with america itself , for the abolition of slavery .
yes , these men were worthy to reconcile captain nemo with that humanity which they represented so nobly in the island .
captain nemo had saved cyrus harding .
thus were explained so many apparently supernatural occurrences , and which all proved the generosity and power of the captain .
nevertheless , this noble misanthrope longed to benefit his proteges still further .
possibly he would not have done this had he been aware that cyrus harding was sufficiently acquainted with his history to address him by the name of nemo .
the captain concluded the narrative of his life .
cyrus harding then spoke ; he recalled all the incidents which had exercised so beneficent an influence upon the colony , and in the names of his companions and himself thanked the generous being to whom they owed so much .
" now , sir , " said he , " now that you know my history , your judgment ! "
some days previous to the flight of the professor and his two companions , the " nautilus , " being chased by a frigate in the north of the atlantic had hurled herself as a ram upon this frigate , and sunk her without mercy .
cyrus harding understood the captain 's allusion , and was silent .
" it was an enemy 's frigate , " exclaimed captain nemo , transformed for an instant into the prince dakkar , " an enemy 's frigate !
" what think you of my life , gentlemen ? "
cyrus harding extended his hand to the ci - devant prince and replied gravely , " sir , your error was in supposing that the past can be resuscitated , and in contending against inevitable progress .
he who is mistaken in an action which he sincerely believes to be right may be an enemy , but retains our esteem .
your error is one that we may admire , and your name has nothing to fear from the judgment of history , which does not condemn heroic folly , but its results . "
the old man 's breast swelled with emotion , and raising his hand to heaven,--
" was i wrong , or in the right ? " he murmured .
cyrus harding replied , " all great actions return to god , from whom they are derived .
captain nemo , we , whom you have succored , shall ever mourn your loss . "
a tear glistened in the eyes of the dying man .
" my child , " he said , " may god bless you ! "
day had returned . no ray of light penetrated into the profundity of the cavern . it being high - water , the entrance was closed by the sea . but the artificial light , which escaped in long streams from the skylights of the " nautilus " was as vivid as before , and the sheet of water shone around the floating vessel .
an extreme exhaustion now overcame captain nemo , who had fallen back upon the divan .
it was useless to contemplate removing him to granite house , for he had expressed his wish to remain in the midst of those marvels of the " nautilus " which millions could not have purchased , and to wait there for that death which was swiftly approaching .
during a long interval of prostration , which rendered him almost unconscious , cyrus harding and gideon spilett attentively observed the condition of the dying man .
all of life was concentrated in the heart and head .
the engineer and reporter consulted in whispers .
was it possible to render any aid to the dying man ?
might his life , if not saved , be prolonged for some days ?
he himself had said that no remedy could avail , and he awaited with tranquillity that death which had for him no terrors .
" we can do nothing , " said gideon spilett .
" but of what is he dying ? " asked pencroft .
" life is simply fading out , " replied the reporter .
" nevertheless , " said the sailor , " if we move him into the open air , and the light of the sun , he might perhaps recover . "
besides , captain nemo would never consent to leave his vessel .
he has lived for a dozen years on board the ' nautilus , ' and on board the ' nautilus ' he desires to die . "
without doubt captain nemo heard cyrus harding 's reply , for he raised himself slightly , and in a voice more feeble , but always intelligible,--
" you are right , sir , " he said .
cyrus harding and his companions had drawn near the divan , and now arranged the cushions in such a manner as to better support the dying man .
they saw his eyes wander over all the marvels of this saloon , lighted by the electric rays which fell from the arabesques of the luminous ceiling .
his glance seemed to rest fondly for the last time on these masterpieces of art and of nature , to which he had limited his horizon during a sojourn of so many years in the abysses of the seas .
cyrus harding respected the captain 's silence , and waited till he should speak .
after some minutes , during which , doubtless , he passed in review his whole life , captain nemo turned to the colonists and said ,
" you consider yourselves , gentlemen , under some obligations to me ? "
" captain , believe us that we would give our lives to prolong yours . "
" we promise , " said cyrus harding .
and by this promise he bound both himself and his companions .
herbert was about to utter an exclamation , but a sign from the captain arrested him .
" to - morrow i shall die , and i desire no other tomb than the ' nautilus . '
it is my grave !
all my friends repose in the depths of the ocean ; their resting - place shall be mine . "
these words were received with profound silence .
" pay attention to my wishes , " he continued .
" the ' nautilus ' is imprisoned in this grotto , the entrance of which is blocked up ; but , although egress is impossible , the vessel may at least sink in the abyss , and there bury my remains . "
the colonists listened reverently to the words of the dying man .
" to - morrow , after my death , mr . harding , " continued the captain , " yourself and companions will leave the ' nautilus , ' for all the treasures it contains must perish with me .
one token alone will remain with you of prince dakkar , with whose history you are now acquainted .
that coffer yonder contains diamonds of the value of many millions , most of them mementoes of the time when , husband and father , i thought happiness possible for me , and a collection of pearls gathered by my friends and myself in the depths of the ocean .
of this treasure at a future day , you may make good use .
in the hands of such men as yourself and your comrades , captain harding , money will never be a source of danger .
" it shall be done , captain , " answered cyrus harding .
" good .
you will then embark in the canoe which brought you hither ; but , before leaving the ' nautilus , ' go to the stern and there open two large stop - cocks which you will find upon the water - line .
the water will penetrate into the reservoirs , and the ' nautilus ' will gradually sink beneath the water to repose at the bottom of the abyss . "
and comprehending a gesture of cyrus harding , the captain added,--
" fear nothing !
you will but bury a corpse ! "
neither cyrus harding nor his companions ventured to offer any observation to captain nemo .
he had expressed his last wishes , and they had nothing to do but to conform to them .
" i have your promise , gentlemen ? " added captain nemo .
" you have , captain , " replied the engineer .
the captain thanked the colonists by a sign , and requested them to leave him for some hours .
gideon spilett wished to remain near him , in the event of a crisis coming on , but the dying man refused , saying , " i shall live until to - morrow , sir . "
all left the saloon , passed through the library and the dining - room , and arrived forward , in the machine - room where the electrical apparatus was established , which supplied not only heat and light , but the mechanical power of the " nautilus . "
the " nautilus " was a masterpiece containing masterpieces with itself , and the engineer was struck with astonishment .
behind this eye was apparently a cabin containing the wheels of the rudder , and in which was stationed the helmsman , when he navigated the " nautilus " over the bed of the ocean , which the electric rays would evidently light up to a considerable distance .
" what a man ! " said pencroft .
" is it possible that he can have lived at the bottom of the sea ?
and it seems to me that perhaps he has not found peace there any more than elsewhere ! "
" the ' nautilus , ' " observed ayrton , " might have enabled us to leave lincoln island and reach some inhabited country . "
" good heavens ! " exclaimed pencroft , " i for one would never risk myself in such a craft .
to sail on the seas , good , but under the seas , never ! "
" i believe , pencroft , " answered the reporter , " that the navigation of a submarine vessel such as the ' nautilus ' ought to be very easy , and that we should soon become accustomed to it .
there would be no storms , no lee - shore to fear .
at some feet beneath the surface the waters of the ocean are as calm as those of a lake . "
" that may be , " replied the sailor , " but i prefer a gale of wind on board a well - found craft .
a vessel is built to sail on the sea , and not beneath it . "
" my friends , " said the engineer , " it is useless , at any rate as regards the ' nautilus , ' to discuss the question of submarine vessels .
his wish is our law , and we will fulfil it . "
captain nemo had somewhat rallied from the prostration which had overcome him , and his eyes shone with their wonted fire .
a faint smile even curled his lips .
the colonists drew around him .
" gentlemen , " said the captain , " you are brave and honest men .
you have devoted yourselves to the common weal .
often have i observed your conduct .
i have esteemed you -- i esteem you still ! your hand , mr . harding . "
cyrus harding gave his hand to the captain , who clasped it affectionately .
" it is well ! " he murmured .
he resumed,--
i have to speak concerning yourselves , and this lincoln island , upon which you have taken refuge .
you now desire to leave it ? "
" to return , captain ! " answered pencroft quickly .
" to return , pencroft ? " said the captain , with a smile . " i know , it is true , your love for this island .
you have helped to make it what it now is , and it seems to you a paradise ! "
" our project , captain , " interposed cyrus harding , " is to annex it to the united states , and to establish for our shipping a port so fortunately situated in this part of the pacific . "
" your thoughts are with your country , gentlemen , " continued the captain ; " your toils are for her prosperity and glory .
you are right .
" you have some last wish to transmit , " said the engineer with emotion , " some souvenir to send to those friends you have left in the mountains of india ? "
" no , captain harding ; no friends remain to me !
i am the last of my race , and to all whom i have known i have long been as are the dead.--but to return to yourselves .
solitude , isolation , are painful things , and beyond human endurance . i die of having thought it possible to live alone !
you should , therefore , dare all in the attempt to leave lincoln island , and see once more the land of your birth .
i am aware that those wretches have destroyed the vessel you have built . "
" it is here that we have known captain nemo , " said cyrus harding .
" it is here only that we can make our home ! " added herbert .
" and here shall i sleep the sleep of eternity , if-- " replied the captain .
he paused for a moment , and , instead of completing the sentence , said simply,--
" mr . harding , i wish to speak with you -- alone ! "
the engineer 's companions , respecting the wish , retired .
cyrus harding remained but a few minutes alone with captain nemo , and soon recalled his companions ; but he said nothing to them of the private matters which the dying man had confided to him .
gideon spilett now watched the captain with extreme care .
it was evident that he was no longer sustained by his moral energy , which had lost the power of reaction against his physical weakness .
the day closed without change .
the colonists did not quit the " nautilus " for a moment .
night arrived , although it was impossible to distinguish it from day in the cavern .
captain nemo suffered no pain , but he was visibly sinking .
his noble features , paled by the approach of death , were perfectly calm .
inaudible words escaped at intervals from his lips , bearing upon various incidents of his checkered career .
once or twice more he spoke to the colonists who stood around him , and smiled on them with that last smile which continues after death .
at length , shortly after midnight , captain nemo by a supreme effort succeeded in folding his arms across his breast , as if wishing in that attitude to compose himself for death .
by one o'clock his glance alone showed signs of life .
cyrus harding , bending low closed the eyes of him who had once been the prince dakkar , and was now not even captain nemo .
turning to his friends , he added , " let us pray for him whom we have lost ! "
some hours later the colonists fulfilled the promise made to the captain by carrying out his dying wishes .
cyrus harding and his companions quitted the " nautilus , " taking with them the only memento left them by their benefactor , the coffer which contained wealth amounting to millions .
the marvelous saloon , still flooded with light , had been carefully closed .
the iron door leading on deck was then securely fastened in such a manner as to prevent even a drop of water from penetrating to the interior of the " nautilus . "
the colonists then descended into the canoe , which was moored to the side of the submarine vessel .
the stop - cocks were opened , the reservoirs filled , and the " nautilus , " slowly sinking , disappeared beneath the surface of the lake .
but the colonists were yet able to follow its descent through the waves .
the powerful light it gave forth lighted up the translucent water , while the cavern became gradually obscure .
at length this vast effusion of electric light faded away , and soon after the " nautilus , " now the tomb of captain nemo , reposed in its ocean bed .
chapter 18
at break of day the colonists regained in silence the entrance of the cavern , to which they gave the name of " dakkar grotto , " in memory of captain nemo .
it was now low - water , and they passed without difficulty under the arcade , washed on the right by the sea .
as additional precaution , pencroft , neb , and ayrton drew it up on a little beach which bordered one of the sides of the grotto , in a spot where it could run no risk of harm .
the storm had ceased during the night . the last low mutterings of the thunder died away in the west . rain fell no longer , but the sky was yet obscured by clouds .
on the whole , this month of october , the first of the southern spring , was not ushered in by satisfactory tokens , and the wind had a tendency to shift from one point of the compass to another , which rendered it impossible to count upon settled weather .
the colonists spoke but little on the road .
the various incidents of the night of october 15th had left a profound impression on their minds .
the unknown being whose influence had so effectually protected them , the man whom their imagination had endowed with supernatural powers , captain nemo , was no more .
they had been accustomed to count upon the intervention of that power which existed no longer , and gideon spilett , and even cyrus harding , could not escape this impression .
thus they maintained a profound silence during their journey to the corral .
towards nine in the morning the colonists arrived at granite house .
it had been agreed that the construction of the vessel should be actively pushed forward , and cyrus harding more than ever devoted his time and labor to this object .
even if , when their vessel should be completed , the colonists should not resolve to leave lincoln island as yet , in order to gain either one of the polynesian archipelagoes of the pacific or the shores of new zealand , they might at least , sooner or later , proceed to tabor island , to leave there the notice relating to ayrton .
it was important that the new vessel should be ready in five months -- that is to say , by the beginning of march -- if they wished to visit tabor island before the equinoctial gales rendered the voyage impracticable .
therefore the carpenters lost not a moment .
moreover , it was unnecessary to manufacture rigging , that of the " speedy " having been saved entire , so that the hull only of the vessel needed to be constructed .
at the expiration of two months and a half the ribs had been set up and the first planks adjusted .
pencroft brought to the task a devouring energy , and would even grumble when one or the other abandoned the carpenter 's axe for the gun of the hunter .
when this happened he grumbled vigorously , and , by way of venting his feelings , did the work of six men .
the weather was very unfavorable during the whole of the summer season .
had this meteor any relation to the phenomena going on in the bowels of the earth ?
was there any connection between the commotion of the atmosphere and that of the interior of the earth ?
cyrus harding was inclined to think that such was the case , for the development of these storms was attended by the renewal of volcanic symptoms .
it was on the 3rd of january that herbert , having ascended at daybreak to the plateau of prospect heights to harness one of the onagers , perceived an enormous hat - shaped cloud rolling from the summit of the volcano .
herbert immediately apprised the colonists , who at once joined him in watching the summit of mount franklin .
" ah ! " exclaimed pencroft , " those are not vapors this time !
it seems to me that the giant is not content with breathing ; he must smoke ! "
this figure of speech employed by the sailor exactly expressed the changes going on at the mouth of the volcano .
already for three months had the crater emitted vapors more or less dense , but which were as yet produced only by an internal ebullition of mineral substances .
but now the vapors were replaced by a thick smoke , rising in the form of a grayish column , more than three hundred feet in width at its base , and which spread like an immense mushroom to a height of from seven to eight hundred feet above the summit of the mountain .
" the fire is in the chimney , " observed gideon spilett .
" and we ca n't put it out ! " replied herbert .
" the volcano ought to be swept , " observed neb , who spoke as if perfectly serious .
" well said , neb ! " cried pencroft , with a shout of laughter ; " and you 'll undertake the job , no doubt ? "
cyrus harding attentively observed the dense smoke emitted by mount franklin , and even listened , as if expecting to hear some distant muttering .
then , turning towards his companions , from whom he had gone somewhat apart , he said,--
" the truth is , my friends , we must not conceal from ourselves that an important change is going forward .
the volcanic substances are no longer in a state of ebullition , they have caught fire , and we are undoubtedly menaced by an approaching eruption . "
" well , captain , " said pencroft , " we shall witness the eruption ; and if it is a good one , we 'll applaud it .
i do n't see that we need concern ourselves further about the matter . "
" it may be so , " replied cyrus harding , " for the ancient track of the lava is still open ; and thanks to this , the crater has hitherto overflowed towards the north .
and yet-- "
" and yet , as we can derive no advantage from an eruption , it might be better it should not take place , " said the reporter .
" who knows ? " answered the sailor .
" perhaps there may be some valuable substance in this volcano , which it will spout forth , and which we may turn to good account ! "
cyrus harding shook his head with the air of a man who augured no good from the phenomenon whose development had been so sudden .
he did not regard so lightly as pencroft the results of an eruption .
if the lava , in consequence of the position of the crater , did not directly menace the wooded and cultivated parts of the island , other complications might present themselves .
in fact , eruptions are not unfrequently accompanied by earthquakes ; and an island of the nature of lincoln island , formed of substances so varied , basalt on one side , granite on the other , lava on the north , rich soil on the south , substances which consequently could not be firmly attached to each other , would be exposed to the risk of disintegration .
although , therefore , the spreading of the volcanic matter might not constitute a serious danger , any movement of the terrestrial structure which should shake the island might entail the gravest consequences .
" it seems to me , " said ayrton , who had reclined so as to place his ear to the ground , " it seems to me that i can hear a dull , rumbling sound , like that of a wagon loaded with bars of iron . "
the colonists listened with the greatest attention , and were convinced that ayrton was not mistaken .
the rumbling was mingled with a subterranean roar , which formed a sort of rinforzando , and died slowly away , as if some violent storm had passed through the profundities of the globe .
" well , then ! " said pencroft , " are we not going back to work ?
let mount franklin smoke , groan , bellow , or spout forth fire and flame as much as it pleases , that is no reason why we should be idle !
come , ayrton , neb , herbert , captain harding , mr . spilett , every one of us must turn to at our work to - day !
therefore there is not an hour to lose ! "
all the colonists , their services thus requisitioned by pencroft , descended to the dockyard , and proceeded to place the keelson , a thick mass of wood which forms the lower portion of a ship and unites firmly the timbers of the hull .
it was an arduous undertaking , in which all took part .
they continued their labors during the whole of this day , the 3rd of january , without thinking further of the volcano , which could not , besides , be seen from the shore of granite house .
but once or twice , large shadows , veiling the sun , which described its diurnal arc through an extremely clear sky , indicated that a thick cloud of smoke passed between its disc and the island .
the wind , blowing on the shore , carried all these vapors to the westward .
who could tell that it might not prove some day their only refuge ?
in the evening , after supper , cyrus harding , gideon spilett , and herbert again ascended the plateau of prospect heights .
it was already dark , and the obscurity would permit them to ascertain if flames or incandescent matter thrown up by the volcano were mingled with the vapor and smoke accumulated at the mouth of the crater .
" the crater is on fire ! " said herbert , who , more active than his companion , first reached the plateau .
mount franklin , distant about six miles , now appeared like a gigantic torch , around the summit of which turned fuliginous flames .
so much smoke , and possibly scoriae and cinders were mingled with them , that their light gleamed but faintly amid the gloom of the night .
but a kind of lurid brilliancy spread over the island , against which stood out confusedly the wooded masses of the heights .
immense whirlwinds of vapor obscured the sky , through which glimmered a few stars .
" the change is rapid ! " said the engineer .
" the reawakening of the volcano already dates back some time .
it was , if i mistake not , about the 15th of october . "
" yes , " replied herbert , " two months and a half ago ! "
" the subterranean fires have therefore been smoldering for ten weeks , " resumed gideon spilett , " and it is not to be wondered at that they now break out with such violence ! "
" do not you feel a certain vibration of the soil ? " asked cyrus harding .
" yes , " replied gideon spilett , " but there is a great difference between that and an earthquake . "
" i do not affirm that we are menaced with an earthquake , " answered cyrus harding , " may god preserve us from that !
no ; these vibrations are due to the effervescence of the central fire .
the crust of the earth is simply the shell of a boiler , and you know that such a shell , under the pressure of steam , vibrates like a sonorous plate .
it is this effect which is being produced at this moment . "
" what magnificent flames ! " exclaimed herbert .
at this instant a kind of bouquet of flames shot forth from the crater , the brilliancy of which was visible even through the vapors .
thousands of luminous sheets and barbed tongues of fire were cast in various directions .
some , extending beyond the dome of smoke , dissipated it , leaving behind an incandescent powder .
this was accompanied by successive explosions , resembling the discharge of a battery of machine - guns .
cyrus harding , the reporter , and herbert , after spending an hour on the plateau of prospect heights , again descended to the beach , and returned to granite house .
the engineer was thoughtful and preoccupied , so much so , indeed , that gideon spilett inquired if he apprehended any immediate danger , of which the eruption might directly or indirectly be the cause .
" yes , and no , " answered cyrus harding .
" nevertheless , " continued the reporter , " would not the greatest misfortune which could happen to us be an earthquake which would overturn the island ?
now , i do not suppose that this is to be feared , since the vapors and lava have found a free outlet . "
" true , " replied cyrus harding , " and i do not fear an earthquake in the sense in which the term is commonly applied to convulsions of the soil provoked by the expansion of subterranean gases .
" how so , my dear cyrus ? '
i must consider . i must visit the mountain . in a few days i shall learn more on this point . "
gideon spilett said no more , and soon , in spite of the explosions of the volcano , whose intensity increased , and which were repeated by the echoes of the island , the inhabitants of granite house were sleeping soundly .
three days passed by -- the 4th , 5th , and 6th of january .
the construction of the vessel was diligently continued , and without offering further explanations the engineer pushed forward the work with all his energy .
mount franklin was now hooded by a somber cloud of sinister aspect , and , amid the flames , vomiting forth incandescent rocks , some of which fell back into the crater itself .
this caused pencroft , who would only look at the matter in the light of a joke , to exclaim,--
" ah ! the giant is playing at cup and ball ; he is a conjurer . "
in fact , the substances thrown up fell back again in to the abyss , and it did not seem that the lava , though swollen by the internal pressure , had yet risen to the orifice of the crater .
at any rate , the opening on the northeast , which was partly visible , poured out no torrent upon the northern slope of the mountain .
nevertheless , however pressing was the construction of the vessel , other duties demanded the presence of the colonists on various portions of the island .
before everything it was necessary to go to the corral , where the flocks of musmons and goats were enclosed , and replenish the provision of forage for those animals .
it was accordingly arranged that ayrton should proceed thither the next day , the 7th of january ; and as he was sufficient for the task , to which he was accustomed , pencroft and the rest were somewhat surprised on hearing the engineer say to ayrton--
" as you are going to - morrow to the corral i will accompany you . "
" but , captain harding , " exclaimed the sailor , " our working days will not be many , and if you go also we shall be two pair of hands short ! "
" we shall return to - morrow , " replied cyrus harding , " but it is necessary that i should go to the corral .
i must learn how the eruption is progressing . "
" an important thing , truly , this eruption ! i trouble myself very little about it . "
whatever might be the sailor 's opinion , the expedition projected by the engineer was settled for the next day .
herbert wished to accompany cyrus harding , but he would not vex pencroft by his absence .
the next day , at dawn , cyrus harding and ayrton , mounting the cart drawn by two onagers , took the road to the corral and set off at a round trot .
above the forest were passing large clouds , to which the crater of mount franklin incessantly added fuliginous matter .
after the eruption of 1783 in iceland for upwards of a year the atmosphere was thus charged with volcanic dust through which the rays of the sun were only with difficulty discernible .
but more often this pulverized matter falls , and this happened on the present occasion .
cyrus harding and ayrton had scarcely reached the corral when a sort of black snow like fine gunpowder fell , and instantly changed the appearance of the soil .
trees , meadows , all disappeared beneath a covering several inches in depth .
but , very fortunately , the wind blew from the northeast , and the greater part of the cloud dissolved itself over the sea .
" this is very singular , captain harding , " said ayrton .
" it is very serious , " replied the engineer .
" this powdered pumice - stone , all this mineral dust , proves how grave is the convulsion going forward in the lower depths of the volcano . "
" but can nothing be done ? "
do you , therefore , ayrton , occupy yourself with the necessary work at the corral .
in the meantime i will ascend just beyond the source of red creek and examine the condition of the mountain upon its northern aspect .
then-- "
" well , captain harding ? "
ayrton then proceeded to enter the corral , and , while awaiting the engineer 's return , busied himself with the musmons and goats which seemed to feel a certain uneasiness in presence of these first signs of an eruption .
meanwhile cyrus harding ascended the crest of the eastern spur , passed red creek , and arrived at the spot where he and his companions had discovered a sulphurous spring at the time of their first exploration .
how changed was everything !
instead of a single column of smoke he counted thirteen , forced through the soil as if violently propelled by some piston .
it was evident that the crust of the earth was subjected in this part of the globe to a frightful pressure .
the atmosphere was saturated with gases and carbonic acid , mingled with aqueous vapors .
cyrus harding felt the volcanic tufa with which the plain was strewn , and which was but pulverized cinders hardened into solid blocks by time , tremble beneath him , but he could discover no traces of fresh lava .
the engineer became more assured of this when he observed all the northern part of mount franklin .
pillars of smoke and flame escaped from the crater ; a hail of scoriae fell on the ground ; but no current of lava burst from the mouth of the volcano , which proved that the volcanic matter had not yet attained the level of the superior orifice of the central shaft .
" but i would prefer that it were so , " said cyrus harding to himself .
" at any rate , i should then know that the lava had followed its accustomed track .
who can say that it may not take a new course ?
but the danger does not consist in that !
captain nemo foresaw it clearly !
there was no doubt in his mind that the most recent eruption had occurred at a far - distant epoch .
ayrton awaited him .
" the animals are cared for , captain harding , " said ayrton .
" good , ayrton . "
" they seem uneasy , captain harding . "
" yes , instinct speaks through them , and instinct is never deceived . "
" are you ready ? "
" take a lamp , ayrton , " answered the engineer ; " we will start at once . "
ayrton did as desired .
the onagers , unharnessed , roamed in the corral .
the gate was secured on the outside , and cyrus harding , preceding ayrton , took the narrow path which led westward to the shore .
the soil they walked upon was choked with the pulverized matter fallen from the cloud .
sometimes a passing breeze raised the covering of ashes , and the two colonists , enveloped in a whirlwind of dust , lost sight of each other .
they were then careful to cover their eyes and mouths with handkerchiefs , for they ran the risk of being blinded and suffocated .
moreover , the atmosphere was close , as if the oxygen had been partly burned up , and had become unfit for respiration .
at every hundred paces they were obliged to stop to take breath .
it was therefore past ten o'clock when the engineer and his companion reached the crest of the enormous mass of rocks of basalt and porphyry which composed the northwest coast of the island .
ayrton and cyrus harding commenced the descent of this abrupt declivity , following almost step for step the difficult path which , during that stormy night , had led them to dakkar grotto .
in open day the descent was less perilous , and , besides , the bed of ashes which covered the polished surface of the rock enabled them to make their footing more secure .
the ridge at the end of the shore , about forty feet in height , was soon reached .
cyrus harding and ayrton found without difficulty the entrance to dakkar grotto , and paused for a moment at the last rock before it .
" the iron boat should be there , " said the engineer .
" it is here , captain harding , " replied ayrton , drawing towards him the fragile craft , which was protected by the arch of the vault .
" on board , ayrton ! "
the two colonists stepped into the boat .
a slight undulation of the waves carried it farther under the low arch of the crypt , and there ayrton , with the aid of flint and steel , lighted the lamp .
he then took the oars , and the lamp having been placed in the bow of the boat , so that its rays fell before them , cyrus harding took the helm and steered through the shades of the grotto .
the " nautilus " was there no longer to illuminate the cavern with its electric light .
possibly it might not yet be extinguished , but no ray escaped from the depths of the abyss in which reposed all that was mortal of captain nemo .
the light afforded by the lamp , although feeble , nevertheless enabled the engineer to advance slowly , following the wall of the cavern .
a deathlike silence reigned under the vaulted roof , or at least in the anterior portion , for soon cyrus harding distinctly heard the rumbling which proceeded from the bowels of the mountain .
" that comes from the volcano , " he said .
besides these sounds , the presence of chemical combinations was soon betrayed by their powerful odor , and the engineer and his companion were almost suffocated by sulphurous vapors .
" this is what captain nemo feared , " murmured cyrus harding , changing countenance .
" we must go to the end , notwithstanding . "
" forward ! " replied ayrton , bending to his oars and directing the boat towards the head of the cavern .
twenty - five minutes after entering the mouth of the grotto the boat reached the extreme end .
cyrus harding then , standing up , cast the light of the lamp upon the walls of the cavern which separated it from the central shaft of the volcano .
what was the thickness of this wall ?
it might be ten feet or a hundred feet -- it was impossible to say .
but the subterranean sounds were too perceptible to allow of the supposition that it was of any great thickness .
the engineer , after having explored the wall at a certain height horizontally , fastened the lamp to the end of an oar , and again surveyed the basaltic wall at a greater elevation .
there , through scarcely visible clefts and joinings , escaped a pungent vapor , which infected the atmosphere of the cavern .
the wall was broken by large cracks , some of which extended to within two or three feet of the water 's edge .
cyrus harding thought for a brief space .
then he said in a low voice,--
" yes ! the captain was right !
the danger lies there , and a terrible danger ! "
ayrton said not a word , but , upon a sign from cyrus harding , resumed the oars , and half an hour later the engineer and he reached the entrance of dakkar grotto .
the next day , the 8th day of january , after a day and night passed at the corral , where they left all in order , cyrus harding and ayrton arrived at granite house .
the engineer immediately called his companions together , and informed them of the imminent danger which threatened lincoln island , and from which no human power could deliver them .
" my friends , " he said , and his voice betrayed the depth of his emotion , " our island is not among those which will endure while this earth endures .
it is doomed to more or less speedy destruction , the cause of which it bears within itself , and from which nothing can save it . "
the colonists looked at each other , then at the engineer .
they did not clearly comprehend him .
" explain yourself , cyrus ! " said gideon spilett .
" i will do so , " replied cyrus harding , " or rather i will simply afford you the explanation which , during our few minutes of private conversation , was given me by captain nemo . "
" captain nemo ! " exclaimed the colonists .
" yes , and it was the last service he desired to render us before his death ! "
" the last service ! " exclaimed pencroft , " the last service !
you will see that though he is dead he will render us others yet ! "
" but what did the captain say ? " inquired the reporter .
" i will tell you , my friends , " said the engineer .
" nonsense !
lincoln island , it ca n't be ! " cried pencroft , who , in spite of the respect he felt for cyrus harding , could not prevent a gesture of incredulity .
" listen , pencroft , " resumed the engineer , " i will tell you what captain nemo communicated to me , and which i myself confirmed yesterday , during the exploration of dakkar grotto .
" this cavern stretches under the island as far as the volcano , and is only separated from its central shaft by the wall which terminates it .
now , this wall is seamed with fissures and clefts which already allow the sulphurous gases generated in the interior of the volcano to escape . "
" well ? " said pencroft , his brow suddenly contracting .
" well , then , i saw that these fissures widen under the internal pressure from within , that the wall of basalt is gradually giving way and that after a longer or shorter period it will afford a passage to the waters of the lake which fill the cavern . "
" good ! " replied pencroft , with an attempt at pleasantry .
" the sea will extinguish the volcano , and there will be an end of the matter ! "
the colonists made no answer to these significant words of the engineer .
they now understood the danger by which they were menaced .
the water , rushing into a cavity whose temperature might be estimated at thousands of degrees , would be converted into steam with a sudden energy which no enclosure could resist .
it was not therefore doubtful that the island , menaced by a frightful and approaching convulsion , would endure only so long as the wall of dakkar grotto itself should endure .
it was not even a question of months , nor of weeks , but of days ; it might be of hours .
the first sentiment which the colonists felt was that of profound sorrow .
they thought not so much of the peril which menaced themselves personally , but of the destruction of the island which had sheltered them , which they had cultivated , which they loved so well , and had hoped to render so flourishing .
so much effort ineffectually expended , so much labor lost .
pencroft could not prevent a large tear from rolling down his cheek , nor did he attempt to conceal it .
all hands , therefore , set to work on the vessel .
what could it avail to sow , to reap , to hunt , to increase the stores of granite house ?
the contents of the storehouse and outbuildings contained more than sufficient to provide the ship for a voyage , however long might be its duration .
but it was imperative that the ship should be ready to receive them before the inevitable catastrophe should arrive .
but during the night of the 23rd , in consequence of the lava attaining the level of the first stratum of the volcano , the hat - shaped cone which formed over the latter disappeared .
a frightful sound was heard .
the colonists at first thought the island was rent asunder , and rushed out of granite house .
this occurred about two o'clock in the morning .
at the same time a torrent of lava , bursting from the new summit , poured out in long cascades , like water escaping from a vase too full , and a thousand tongues of fire crept over the sides of the volcano .
" the corral ! the corral ! " exclaimed ayrton .
it was , in fact , towards the corral that the lava was rushing as the new crater faced the east , and consequently the fertile portions of the island , the springs of red creek and jacamar wood , were menaced with instant destruction .
before three in the morning they arrived at the corral .
the cries of the terrified musmons and goats indicated the alarm which possessed them .
already a torrent of burning matter and liquefied minerals fell from the side of the mountain upon the meadows as far as the side of the palisade .
the gate was burst open by ayrton , and the animals , bewildered with terror , fled in all directions .
to contend against this disaster would have been folly -- nay , madness .
cyrus harding and his companions , before returning to granite house , desired to ascertain the probable direction this inundation of lava was about to take .
the soil sloped gradually from mount franklin to the east coast , and it was to be feared that , in spite of the thick jacamar wood , the torrent would reach the plateau of prospect heights .
" the lake will cover us , " said gideon spilett .
" i hope so ! " was cyrus harding 's only reply .
from two openings in its southern and eastern sides an unceasing flow of lava poured forth , thus forming two distinct streams .
above the new crater a cloud of smoke and ashes , mingled with those of the atmosphere , massed over the island .
loud peals of thunder broke , and could scarcely be distinguished from the rumblings of the mountain , whose mouth vomited forth ignited rocks , which , hurled to more than a thousand feet , burst in the air like shells .
flashes of lightning rivaled in intensity the volcano 's eruption .
towards seven in the morning the position was no longer tenable by the colonists , who accordingly took shelter in the borders of jacamar wood .
not only did the projectiles begin to rain around them , but the lava , overflowing the bed of red creek , threatened to cut off the road to the corral .
the nearest rows of trees caught fire , and their sap , suddenly transformed into vapor , caused them to explode with loud reports , while others , less moist , remained unhurt in the midst of the inundation .
they proceeded but slowly , frequently looking back ; but , in consequence of the inclination of the soil , the lava gained rapidly in the east , and as its lower waves became solidified others , at boiling heat , covered them immediately .
meanwhile , the principal stream of red creek valley became more and more menacing .
all this portion of the forest was on fire , and enormous wreaths of smoke rolled over the trees , whose trunks were already consumed by the lava .
the colonists halted near the lake , about half a mile from the mouth of red creek .
a question of life or death was now to be decided .
cyrus harding , accustomed to the consideration of important crises , and aware that he was addressing men capable of hearing the truth , whatever it might be , then said,--
we shall have no prospect but that of starvation upon these barren rocks -- a death which will probably be anticipated by the explosion of the island . "
" in that case , " replied pencroft , folding his arms and stamping his foot , " what 's the use of working any longer on the vessel ? "
" pencroft , " answered cyrus harding , " we must do our duty to the last ! "
at this instant the river of lava , after having broken a passage through the noble trees it devoured in its course , reached the borders of the lake .
at this point there was an elevation of the soil which , had it been greater , might have sufficed to arrest the torrent .
" to work ! " cried cyrus harding .
the engineer 's thought was at once understood .
it might be possible to dam , as it were , the torrent , and thus compel it to pour itself into the lake .
the stream of lava swelled like a river about to overflow its banks , and threatened to demolish the sole obstacle which could prevent it from overrunning the whole far west .
but the dam held firm , and after a moment of terrible suspense the torrent precipitated itself into grant lake from a height of twenty feet .
the colonists , without moving or uttering a word , breathlessly regarded this strife of the two elements .
what a spectacle was this conflict between water and fire !
what pen could describe the marvelous horror of this scene -- what pencil could depict it ?
the water hissed as it evaporated by contact with the boiling lava .
the vapor whirled in the air to an immeasurable height , as if the valves of an immense boiler had been suddenly opened .
but , however considerable might be the volume of water contained in the lake , it must eventually be absorbed , because it was not replenished , while the stream of lava , fed from an inexhaustible source , rolled on without ceasing new waves of incandescent matter .
the first waves of lava which fell in the lake immediately solidified and accumulated so as speedily to emerge from it .
upon their surface fell other waves , which in their turn became stone , but a step nearer the center of the lake .
where formerly stretched the calm waters of the lake now appeared an enormous mass of smoking rocks , as if an upheaving of the soil had formed immense shoals .
imagine the waters of the lake aroused by a hurricane , then suddenly solidified by an intense frost , and some conception may be formed of the aspect of the lake three hours after the eruption of this irresistible torrent of lava .
this time water would be vanquished by fire .
nevertheless it was a fortunate circumstance for the colonists that the effusion of lava should have been in the direction of lake grant .
the plateau of prospect heights , granite house , and the dockyard were for the moment preserved .
and these few days it was necessary to employ in planking and carefully calking the vessel , and launching her .
the colonists would then take refuge on board the vessel , content to rig her after she should be afloat on the waters .
with the danger of an explosion which threatened to destroy the island there could be no security on shore .
the walls of granite house , once so sure a retreat , might at any moment fall in upon them .
during the six following days , from the 25th to the 30th of january , the colonists accomplished as much of the construction of their vessel as twenty men could have done .
they hardly allowed themselves a moment 's repose , and the glare of the flames which shot from the crater enabled them to work night and day .
but if the island was thus partially protected on this side , it was not so with the western part .
in fact , the second stream of lava , which had followed the valley of falls river , a valley of great extent , the land on both sides of the creek being flat , met with no obstacle .
the burning liquid had then spread through the forest of the far west .
at this period of the year , when the trees were dried up by a tropical heat , the forest caught fire instantaneously , in such a manner that the conflagration extended itself both by the trunks of the trees and by their higher branches , whose interlacement favored its progress .
it even appeared that the current of flame spread more rapidly among the summits of the trees than the current of lava at their bases .
thus it happened that the wild animals , jaguars , wild boars , capybaras , koalas , and game of every kind , mad with terror , had fled to the banks of the mercy and to the tadorn marsh , beyond the road to port balloon .
but the colonists were too much occupied with their task to pay any attention to even the most formidable of these animals .
each day cyrus harding and gideon spilett ascended the plateau of prospect heights .
sometimes herbert accompanied them , but never pencroft , who could not bear to look upon the prospect of the island now so utterly devastated .
it was , in truth , a heart - rending spectacle .
in the valleys of the falls and mercy rivers no drop of water now flowed towards the sea , and should lake grant be entirely dried up , the colonists would have no means of quenching their thirst .
but , fortunately the lava had spared the southern corner of the lake , containing all that remained of the drinking water of the island .
towards the northwest stood out the rugged and well - defined outlines of the sides of the volcano , like a gigantic claw hovering over the island .
" it is enough to break one 's heart ! " said gideon spilett , one day .
" yes , spilett , " answered the engineer .
" may god grant us the time to complete this vessel , now our sole refuge ! "
" do not you think , cyrus , that the violence of the eruption has somewhat lessened ?
the volcano still vomits forth lava , but somewhat less abundantly , if i mistake not . "
" it matters little , " answered cyrus harding .
" the fire is still burning in the interior of the mountain , and the sea may break in at any moment .
we are in the condition of passengers whose ship is devoured by a conflagration which they can not extinguish , and who know that sooner or later the flames must reach the powder - magazine .
to work , spilett , to work , and let us not lose an hour ! "
during eight days more , that is to say until the 7th of february , the lava continued to flow , but the eruption was confined within the previous limits .
cyrus harding feared above all lest the liquefied matter should overflow the shore , for in that event the dockyard could not escape .
moreover , about this time the colonists felt in the frame of the island vibrations which alarmed them to the highest degree .
it was the 20th of february .
yet another month must elapse before the vessel would be ready for sea .
would the island hold together till then ?
the intention of pencroft and cyrus harding was to launch the vessel as soon as the hull should be complete .
the deck , the upperworks , the interior woodwork and the rigging might be finished afterwards , but the essential point was that the colonists should have an assured refuge away from the island .
all the exertions of the voyagers were therefore concentrated upon the completion of the hull .
thus the 3rd of march arrived , and they might calculate upon launching the vessel in ten days .
hope revived in the hearts of the colonists , who had , in this fourth year of their sojourn on lincoln island , suffered so many trials .
even pencroft lost in some measure the somber taciturnity occasioned by the devastation and ruin of his domain .
" we shall finish it , " he said to the engineer , " we shall finish it , captain , and it is time , for the season is advancing and the equinox will soon be here .
well , if necessary , we must put in to tabor island to spend the winter .
ah , how unfortunate !
who could have believed it possible ? "
" let us get on , " was the engineer 's invariable reply .
and they worked away without losing a moment .
" master , " asked neb , a few days later , " do you think all this could have happened if captain nemo had been still alive ? "
" certainly , neb , " answered cyrus harding .
" i , for one , do n't believe it ! " whispered pencroft to neb .
" nor i ! " answered neb seriously .
during the first week of march appearances again became menacing .
thousands of threads like glass , formed of fluid lava , fell like rain upon the island .
the crater was again boiling with lava which overflowed the back of the volcano .
the torrent flowed along the surface of the hardened tufa , and destroyed the few meager skeletons of trees which had withstood the first eruption .
the stream , flowing this time towards the southwest shore of lake grant , stretched beyond creek glycerine , and invaded the plateau of prospect heights .
this last blow to the work of the colonists was terrible .
the mill , the buildings of the inner court , the stables , were all destroyed .
the affrighted poultry fled in all directions .
top and jup showed signs of the greatest alarm , as if their instinct warned them of an impending catastrophe .
but even this last retreat was now closed to them , and the lava - torrent , flowing over the edge of the granite wall , began to pour down upon the beach its cataracts of fire .
the sublime horror of this spectacle passed all description .
during the night it could only be compared to a niagara of molten fluid , with its incandescent vapors above and its boiling masses below .
the colonists were driven to their last entrenchment , and although the upper seams of the vessel were not yet calked , they decided to launch her at once .
pencroft and ayrton therefore set about the necessary preparations for the launching , which was to take place the morning of the next day , the 9th of march .
but during the night of the 8th an enormous column of vapor escaping from the crater rose with frightful explosions to a height of more than three thousand feet .
the wall of dakkar grotto had evidently given way under the pressure of gases , and the sea , rushing through the central shalt into the igneous gulf , was at once converted into vapor .
but the crater could not afford a sufficient outlet for this vapor . an explosion , which might have been heard at a distance of a hundred miles , shook the air .
fragments of mountains fell into the pacific , and , in a few minutes , the ocean rolled over the spot where lincoln island once stood .
an isolated rock , thirty feet in length , twenty in breadth , scarcely ten from the water 's edge , such was the only solid point which the waves of the pacific had not engulfed .
it was all that remained of the structure of granite house !
all around had disappeared in the abyss ; the inferior cone of mount franklin , rent asunder by the explosion ; the lava jaws of shark gulf , the plateau of prospect heights , safety islet , the granite rocks of port balloon , the basalts of dakkar grotto , the long serpentine peninsula , so distant nevertheless from the center of the eruption .
all that could now be seen of lincoln island was the narrow rock which now served as a refuge to the six colonists and their dog top .
the animals had also perished in the catastrophe ; the birds , as well as those representing the fauna of the island -- all either crushed or drowned , and the unfortunate jup himself had , alas ! found his death in some crevice of the soil .
if cyrus harding , gideon spilett , herbert , pencroft , neb , and ayrton had survived , it was because , assembled under their tent , they had been hurled into the sea at the instant when the fragments of the island rained down on every side .
when they reached the surface they could only perceive , at half a cable 's length , this mass of rocks , towards which they swam and on which they found footing .
on this barren rock they had now existed for nine days .
a few provisions taken from the magazine of granite house before the catastrophe , a little fresh water from the rain which had fallen in a hollow of the rock , was all that the unfortunate colonists possessed .
their last hope , the vessel , had been shattered to pieces .
they had no means of quitting the reef ; no fire , nor any means of obtaining it .
it seemed that they must inevitably perish .
this day , the 18th of march , there remained only provisions for two days , although they limited their consumption to the bare necessaries of life .
all their science and intelligence could avail them nothing in their present position .
they were in the hand of god .
cyrus harding was calm , gideon spilett more nervous , and pencroft , a prey to sullen anger , walked to and fro on the rock .
herbert did not for a moment quit the engineer 's side , as if demanding from him that assistance he had no power to give .
neb and ayrton were resigned to their fate .
" ah , what a misfortune ! what a misfortune ! " often repeated pencroft .
" if we had but a walnut - shell to take us to tabor island !
but we have nothing , nothing ! "
" captain nemo did right to die , " said neb .
during the five ensuing days cyrus harding and his unfortunate companions husbanded their provisions with the most extreme care , eating only what would prevent them from dying of starvation .
their weakness was extreme . herbert and neb began to show symptoms of delirium .
under these circumstances was it possible for them to retain even the shadow of a hope ?
no !
what was their sole remaining chance ?
that a vessel should appear in sight of the rock ?
but they knew only too well from experience that no ships ever visited this part of the pacific .
could they calculate that , by a truly providential coincidence , the scotch yacht would arrive precisely at this time in search of ayrton at tabor island ?
it was scarcely probable ; and , besides , supposing she should come there , as the colonists had not been able to deposit a notice pointing out ayrton 's change of abode , the commander of the yacht , after having explored tabor island without results , would again set sail and return to lower latitudes .
no ! no hope of being saved could be retained , and a horrible death , death from hunger and thirst , awaited them upon this rock .
already they were stretched on the rock , inanimate , and no longer conscious of what passed around them .
ayrton alone , by a supreme effort , from time to time raised his head , and cast a despairing glance over the desert ocean .
she was evidently not without an object .
the reef was the mark for which she was making in a direct line , under all steam , and the unfortunate colonists might have made her out some hours before if they had had the strength to watch the horizon .
" the ' duncan ' ! " murmured ayrton -- and fell back without sign of life .
when cyrus harding and his companions recovered consciousness , thanks to the attention lavished upon them , they found themselves in the cabin of a steamer , without being able to comprehend how they had escaped death .
a word from ayrton explained everything .
" the ' duncan ' ! " he murmured .
" the ' duncan ' ! " exclaimed cyrus harding .
and raising his hand to heaven , he said , " oh ! almighty god ! mercifully hast thou preserved us ! "
it was , in fact , the " duncan , " lord glenarvan 's yacht , now commanded by robert , son of captain grant , who had been despatched to tabor island to find ayrton , and bring him back to his native land after twelve years of expiation .
the colonists were not only saved , but already on the way to their native country .
" captain grant , " asked cyrus harding , " who can have suggested to you the idea , after having left tabor island , where you did not find ayrton , of coming a hundred miles farther northeast ? "
" captain harding , " replied robert grant , " it was in order to find , not only ayrton , but yourself and your companions . "
" my companions and myself ? "
" doubtless , at lincoln island . "
" at lincoln island ! " exclaimed in a breath gideon spilett , herbert , neb , and pencroft , in the highest degree astonished .
" how could you be aware of the existence of lincoln island ? " inquired cyrus harding , " it is not even named in the charts . "
" i knew of it from a document left by you on tabor island , " answered robert grant .
" a document ! " cried gideon spilett .
" without doubt , and here it is , " answered robert grant , producing a paper which indicated the longitude and latitude of lincoln island , " the present residence of ayrton and five american colonists . "
" it is captain nemo ! " cried cyrus harding , after having read the notice , and recognized that the handwriting was similar to that of the paper found at the corral .
" ah ! " said pencroft , " it was then he who took our ' bonadventure ' and hazarded himself alone to go to tabor island ! "
" in order to leave this notice , " added herbert .
" i was then right in saying , " exclaimed the sailor , " that even after his death the captain would render us a last service . "
" my friends , " said cyrus harding , in a voice of the profoundest emotion , " may the god of mercy have had pity on the soul of captain nemo , our benefactor . "
the colonists uncovered themselves at these last words of cyrus harding , and murmured the name of captain nemo .
then ayrton , approaching the engineer , said simply , " where should this coffer be deposited ? "
" ayrton ! ayrton ! " said cyrus harding , deeply touched .
then , addressing robert grant , " sir , " he added , " you left behind you a criminal ; you find in his place a man who has become honest by penitence , and whose hand i am proud to clasp in mine . "
robert grant was now made acquainted with the strange history of captain nemo and the colonists of lincoln island .
then , observation being taken of what remained of this shoal , which must henceforward figure on the charts of the pacific , the order was given to make all sail .
a few weeks afterwards the colonists landed in america , and found their country once more at peace after the terrible conflict in which right and justice had triumphed .
of the treasures contained in the coffer left by captain nemo to the colonists of lincoln island , the larger portion was employed in the purchase of a vast territory in the state of iowa .
one pearl alone , the finest , was reserved from the treasure and sent to lady glenarvan in the name of the castaways restored to their country by the " duncan . "
there , upon this domain , the colonists invited to labor , that is to say , to wealth and happiness , all those to whom they had hoped to offer the hospitality of lincoln island .
there was founded a vast colony to which they gave the name of that island sunk beneath the waters of the pacific .
a river there was called the mercy , a mountain took the name of mount franklin , a small lake was named lake grant , and the forests became the forests of the far west .
it might have been an island on terra firma .
there , under the intelligent hands of the engineer and his companions , everything prospered .
not one of the former colonists of lincoln island was absent , for they had sworn to live always together . neb was with his master ; ayrton was there ready to sacrifice himself for all ; pencroft was more a farmer than he had ever been a sailor ; herbert , who completed his studies under the superintendence of cyrus harding , and gideon spilett , who founded the new lincoln herald , the best - informed journal in the world .
there , to conclude , all were happy , united in the present as they had been in the past ; but never could they forget that island upon which they had arrived poor and friendless , that island which , during four years had supplied all their wants , and of which there remained but a fragment of granite washed by the waves of the pacific , the tomb of him who had borne the name of captain nemo .
source : project gutenbergaudiobook available here
the three musketeers
alexandre dumas
the title attracted me ; i took them home with me , with the permission of the guardian , and devoured them .
they will therein find portraits penciled by the hand of a master ; and although these squibs may be , for the most part , traced upon the doors of barracks and the walls of cabarets , they will not find the likenesses of louis xiii , anne of austria , richelieu , mazarin , and the courtiers of the period , less faithful than in the history of m. anquetil .
but , it is well known , what strikes the capricious mind of the poet is not always what affects the mass of readers .
dartagnan relates that on his first visit to m. de treville , captain of the king s musketeers , he met in the antechamber three young men , serving in the illustrious corps into which he was soliciting the honor of being received , bearing the names of athos , porthos , and aramis .
from the moment we had no rest till we could find some trace in contemporary works of these extraordinary names which had so strongly awakened our curiosity .
the catalogue alone of the books we read with this object would fill a whole chapter , which , although it might be very instructive , would certainly afford our readers but little amusement .
it will suffice , then , to tell them that at the moment at which , discouraged by so many fruitless investigations , we were about to abandon our search , we at length found , guided by the counsels of our illustrious friend paulin paris , a manuscript in folio , endorsed 4772 or 4773 , we do not recollect which , having for title , " memoirs of the comte de la fere , touching some events which passed in france toward the end of the reign of king louis xiii and the commencement of the reign of king louis xiv . "
it may be easily imagined how great was our joy when , in turning over this manuscript , our last hope , we found at the twentieth page the name of athos , at the twenty - seventh the name of porthos , and at the thirty - first the name of aramis .
the discovery of a completely unknown manuscript at a period in which historical science is carried to such a high degree appeared almost miraculous .
this permission , we feel bound to say , was graciously granted ; which compels us here to give a public contradiction to the slanderers who pretend that we live under a government but moderately indulgent to men of letters .
in the meanwhile , as the godfather is a second father , we beg the reader to lay to our account , and not to that of the comte de la fere , the pleasure or the ennui he may experience .
this being understood , let us proceed with our history .
1 the three presents of dartagnan the elder
many citizens , seeing the women flying toward the high street , leaving their children crying at the open doors , hastened to don the cuirass , and supporting their somewhat uncertain courage with a musket or a partisan , directed their steps toward the hostelry of the jolly miller , before which was gathered , increasing every minute , a compact group , vociferous and full of curiosity .
in those times panics were common , and few days passed without some city or other registering in its archives an event of this kind .
there were nobles , who made war against each other ; there was the king , who made war against the cardinal ; there was spain , which made war against the king .
it resulted , then , from this habit that on the said first monday of april , 1625 , the citizens , on hearing the clamor , and seeing neither the red - and - yellow standard nor the livery of the duc de richelieu , rushed toward the hostel of the jolly miller .
when arrived there , the cause of the hubbub was apparent to all .
for our young man had a steed which was the observed of all observers . it was a bearn pony , from twelve to fourteen years old , yellow in his hide , without a hair in his tail , but not without windgalls on his legs , which , though going with his head lower than his knees , rendering a martingale quite unnecessary , contrived nevertheless to perform his eight leagues a day .
unfortunately , the qualities of this horse were so well concealed under his strange - colored hide and his unaccountable gait , that at a time when everybody was a connoisseur in horseflesh , the appearance of the aforesaid pony at meung -- which place he had entered about a quarter of an hour before , by the gate of beaugency -- produced an unfavorable feeling , which extended to his rider .
and this feeling had been more painfully perceived by young dartagnan -- for so was the don quixote of this second rosinante named -- from his not being able to conceal from himself the ridiculous appearance that such a steed gave him , good horseman as he was . he had sighed deeply , therefore , when accepting the gift of the pony from m. dartagnan the elder .
he was not ignorant that such a beast was worth at least twenty livres ; and the words which had accompanied the present were above all price .
it is by his courage , please observe , by his courage alone , that a gentleman can make his way nowadays .
whoever hesitates for a second perhaps allows the bait to escape which during that exact second fortune held out to him .
never fear quarrels , but seek adventures .
i have taught you how to handle a sword ; you have thews of iron , a wrist of steel . fight on all occasions . fight the more for duels being forbidden , since consequently there is twice as much courage in fighting .
i have nothing to give you , my son , but fifteen crowns , my horse , and the counsels you have just heard .
your mother will add to them a recipe for a certain balsam , which she had from a bohemian and which has the miraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach the heart .
take advantage of all , and live happily and long . i have but one word to add , and that is to propose an example to you -- not mine , for i myself have never appeared at court , and have only taken part in religious wars as a volunteer ; i speak of monsieur de treville , who was formerly my neighbor , and who had the honor to be , as a child , the play - fellow of our king , louis xiii , whom god preserve !
sometimes their play degenerated into battles , and in these battles the king was not always the stronger .
the blows which he received increased greatly his esteem and friendship for monsieur de treville .
afterward , monsieur de treville fought with others : in his first journey to paris , five times ; from the death of the late king till the young one came of age , without reckoning wars and sieges , seven times ; and from that date up to the present day , a hundred times , perhaps ! so that in spite of edicts , ordinances , and decrees , there he is , captain of the musketeers ; that is to say , chief of a legion of caesars , whom the king holds in great esteem and whom the cardinal dreads -- he who dreads nothing , as it is said .
still further , monsieur de treville gains ten thousand crowns a year ; he is therefore a great noble . he began as you begin . go to him with this letter , and make him your model in order that you may do as he has done . "
upon which m. dartagnan the elder girded his own sword round his son , kissed him tenderly on both cheeks , and gave him his benediction .
on leaving the paternal chamber , the young man found his mother , who was waiting for him with the famous recipe of which the counsels we have just repeated would necessitate frequent employment .
she wept abundantly ; and -- let us speak it to the praise of m. dartagnan the younger -- notwithstanding the efforts he made to remain firm , as a future musketeer ought , nature prevailed , and he shed many tears , of which he succeeded with great difficulty in concealing the half .
the same day the young man set forward on his journey , furnished with the three paternal gifts , which consisted , as we have said , of fifteen crowns , the horse , and the letter for m. de treville -- the counsels being thrown into the bargain .
it was not that the sight of the wretched pony did not excite numerous smiles on the countenances of passers - by ; but as against the side of this pony rattled a sword of respectable length , and as over this sword gleamed an eye rather ferocious than haughty , these passers - by repressed their hilarity , or if hilarity prevailed over prudence , they endeavored to laugh only on one side , like the masks of the ancients .
dartagnan , then , remained majestic and intact in his susceptibility , till he came to this unlucky city of meung .
this time dartagnan was only in part mistaken ; he himself was not in question , but his horse was .
the gentleman appeared to be enumerating all his qualities to his auditors ; and , as i have said , the auditors seeming to have great deference for the narrator , they every moment burst into fits of laughter .
now , as a half - smile was sufficient to awaken the irascibility of the young man , the effect produced upon him by this vociferous mirth may be easily imagined .
nevertheless , dartagnan was desirous of examining the appearance of this impertinent personage who ridiculed him .
this time there could be no doubt ; dartagnan was really insulted . full , then , of this conviction , he pulled his cap down over his eyes , and endeavoring to copy some of the court airs he had picked up in gascony among young traveling nobles , he advanced with one hand on the hilt of his sword and the other resting on his hip .
unfortunately , as he advanced , his anger increased at every step ; and instead of the proper and lofty speech he had prepared as a prelude to his challenge , he found nothing at the tip of his tongue but a gross personality , which he accompanied with a furious gesture .
" i say , sir , you sir , who are hiding yourself behind that shutter -- yes , you , sir , tell me what you are laughing at , and we will laugh together ! "
the gentleman raised his eyes slowly from the nag to his cavalier , as if he required some time to ascertain whether it could be to him that such strange reproaches were addressed ; then , when he could not possibly entertain any doubt of the matter , his eyebrows slightly bent , and with an accent of irony and insolence impossible to be described , he replied to dartagnan , " i was not speaking to you , sir . "
" but i am speaking to you ! " replied the young man , additionally exasperated with this mixture of insolence and good manners , of politeness and scorn .
the stranger looked at him again with a slight smile , and retiring from the window , came out of the hostelry with a slow step , and placed himself before the horse , within two paces of dartagnan .
his quiet manner and the ironical expression of his countenance redoubled the mirth of the persons with whom he had been talking , and who still remained at the window .
dartagnan , seeing him approach , drew his sword a foot out of the scabbard .
" i do not often laugh , sir , " replied the stranger , " as you may perceive by the expression of my countenance ; but nevertheless i retain the privilege of laughing when i please . "
" and i , " cried dartagnan , " will allow no man to laugh when it displeases me ! "
" indeed , sir , " continued the stranger , more calm than ever ; " well , that is perfectly right ! " and turning on his heel , was about to re - enter the hostelry by the front gate , beneath which dartagnan on arriving had observed a saddled horse .
but , dartagnan was not of a character to allow a man to escape him thus who had the insolence to ridicule him .
he drew his sword entirely from the scabbard , and followed him , crying , " turn , turn , master joker , lest i strike you behind ! "
" strike me ! " said the other , turning on his heels , and surveying the young man with as much astonishment as contempt .
" why , my good fellow , you must be mad ! "
then , in a suppressed tone , as if speaking to himself , " this is annoying , " continued he . " what a godsend this would be for his majesty , who is seeking everywhere for brave fellows to recruit for his musketeers ! "
he had scarcely finished , when dartagnan made such a furious lunge at him that if he had not sprung nimbly backward , it is probable he would have jested for the last time .
the stranger , then perceiving that the matter went beyond raillery , drew his sword , saluted his adversary , and seriously placed himself on guard .
but at the same moment , his two auditors , accompanied by the host , fell upon dartagnan with sticks , shovels and tongs .
this caused so rapid and complete a diversion from the attack that dartagnan s adversary , while the latter turned round to face this shower of blows , sheathed his sword with the same precision , and instead of an actor , which he had nearly been , became a spectator of the fight -- a part in which he acquitted himself with his usual impassiveness , muttering , nevertheless , " a plague upon these gascons !
replace him on his orange horse , and let him begone ! "
" not before i have killed you , poltroon ! " cried dartagnan , making the best face possible , and never retreating one step before his three assailants , who continued to shower blows upon him .
" another gasconade ! " murmured the gentleman . " by my honor , these gascons are incorrigible !
keep up the dance , then , since he will have it so .
but the stranger knew not the headstrong personage he had to do with ; dartagnan was not the man ever to cry for quarter .
the fight was therefore prolonged for some seconds ; but at length dartagnan dropped his sword , which was broken in two pieces by the blow of a stick .
another blow full upon his forehead at the same moment brought him to the ground , covered with blood and almost fainting .
it was at this moment that people came flocking to the scene of action from all sides .
the host , fearful of consequences , with the help of his servants carried the wounded man into the kitchen , where some trifling attentions were bestowed upon him .
as to the gentleman , he resumed his place at the window , and surveyed the crowd with a certain impatience , evidently annoyed by their remaining undispersed .
" well , how is it with this madman ? " exclaimed he , turning round as the noise of the door announced the entrance of the host , who came in to inquire if he was unhurt .
" your excellency is safe and sound ? " asked the host .
" oh , yes ! perfectly safe and sound , my good host ; and i wish to know what has become of our young man . "
" he is better , " said the host , " he fainted quite away . "
" indeed ! " said the gentleman .
" but before he fainted , he collected all his strength to challenge you , and to defy you while challenging you . "
" why , this fellow must be the devil in person ! " cried the stranger .
" then , " said the stranger coolly , " he must be some prince in disguise . "
" i have told you this , good sir , " resumed the host , " in order that you may be on your guard . "
" did he name no one in his passion ? "
" yes ; he struck his pocket and said ,  we shall see what monsieur de treville will think of this insult offered to his protege .  "
" monsieur de treville ? " said the stranger , becoming attentive , " he put his hand upon his pocket while pronouncing the name of monsieur de treville ?
now , my dear host , while your young man was insensible , you did not fail , i am quite sure , to ascertain what that pocket contained .
what was there in it ? "
" a letter addressed to monsieur de treville , captain of the musketeers . "
" indeed ! "
" exactly as i have the honor to tell your excellency . "
the host , who was not endowed with great perspicacity , did not observe the expression which his words had given to the physiognomy of the stranger .
the latter rose from the front of the window , upon the sill of which he had leaned with his elbow , and knitted his brow like a man disquieted .
" the devil ! " murmured he , between his teeth . " can treville have set this gascon upon me ?
he is very young ; but a sword thrust is a sword thrust , whatever be the age of him who gives it , and a youth is less to be suspected than an older man , " and the stranger fell into a reverie which lasted some minutes .
" a weak obstacle is sometimes sufficient to overthrow a great design .
" host , " said he , " could you not contrive to get rid of this frantic boy for me ?
in conscience , i can not kill him ; and yet , " added he , with a coldly menacing expression , " he annoys me .
where is he ? "
" in my wife s chamber , on the first flight , where they are dressing his wounds . "
" his things and his bag are with him ? has he taken off his doublet ? "
" on the contrary , everything is in the kitchen .
but if he annoys you , this young fool-- "
" to be sure he does . he causes a disturbance in your hostelry , which respectable people can not put up with .
go ; make out my bill and notify my servant . "
" what , monsieur , will you leave us so soon ? "
" you know that very well , as i gave my order to saddle my horse .
have they not obeyed me ? "
" it is done ; as your excellency may have observed , your horse is in the great gateway , ready saddled for your departure . "
" that is well ; do as i have directed you , then . "
" what the devil ! " said the host to himself . " can he be afraid of this boy ? "
but an imperious glance from the stranger stopped him short ; he bowed humbly and retired .
we are well aware that this term , milady , is only properly used when followed by a family name .
but we find it thus in the manuscript , and we do not choose to take upon ourselves to alter it .
and the stranger , muttering to himself , directed his steps toward the kitchen .
in the meantime , the host , who entertained no doubt that it was the presence of the young man that drove the stranger from his hostelry , re - ascended to his wife s chamber , and found dartagnan just recovering his senses .
giving him to understand that the police would deal with him pretty severely for having sought a quarrel with a great lord -- for the opinion of the host the stranger could be nothing less than a great lord -- he insisted that notwithstanding his weakness dartagnan should get up and depart as quickly as possible .
dartagnan , half stupefied , without his doublet , and with his head bound up in a linen cloth , arose then , and urged by the host , began to descend the stairs ; but on arriving at the kitchen , the first thing he saw was his antagonist talking calmly at the step of a heavy carriage , drawn by two large norman horses .
his interlocutor , whose head appeared through the carriage window , was a woman of from twenty to two - and - twenty years .
she was pale and fair , with long curls falling in profusion over her shoulders , had large , blue , languishing eyes , rosy lips , and hands of alabaster .
she was talking with great animation with the stranger .
" his eminence , then , orders me-- " said the lady .
" to return instantly to england , and to inform him as soon as the duke leaves london . "
" and as to my other instructions ? " asked the fair traveler .
" they are contained in this box , which you will not open until you are on the other side of the channel . "
" very well ; and you -- what will you do ? "
" i -- i return to paris . "
" what , without chastising this insolent boy ? " asked the lady .
the stranger was about to reply ; but at the moment he opened his mouth , dartagnan , who had heard all , precipitated himself over the threshold of the door .
" this insolent boy chastises others , " cried he ; " and i hope that this time he whom he ought to chastise will not escape him as before . "
" will not escape him ? " replied the stranger , knitting his brow .
" no ; before a woman you would dare not fly , i presume ? "
" remember , " said milady , seeing the stranger lay his hand on his sword , " the least delay may ruin everything . "
" you are right , " cried the gentleman ; " begone then , on your part , and i will depart as quickly on mine . "
and bowing to the lady , sprang into his saddle , while her coachman applied his whip vigorously to his horses .
the two interlocutors thus separated , taking opposite directions , at full gallop .
" pay him , booby ! " cried the stranger to his servant , without checking the speed of his horse ; and the man , after throwing two or three silver pieces at the foot of mine host , galloped after his master .
" base coward ! false gentleman ! " cried dartagnan , springing forward , in his turn , after the servant .
but his wound had rendered him too weak to support such an exertion .
scarcely had he gone ten steps when his ears began to tingle , a faintness seized him , a cloud of blood passed over his eyes , and he fell in the middle of the street , crying still , " coward ! coward ! coward ! "
" yes , a base coward , " murmured dartagnan ; " but she -- she was very beautiful . "
" what she ? " demanded the host .
" milady , " faltered dartagnan , and fainted a second time .
" ah , it s all one , " said the host ; " i have lost two customers , but this one remains , of whom i am pretty certain for some days to come .
there will be eleven crowns gained . "
it is to be remembered that eleven crowns was just the sum that remained in dartagnan s purse .
the host had reckoned upon eleven days of confinement at a crown a day , but he had reckoned without his guest .
" my letter of recommendation ! " cried dartagnan , " my letter of recommendation ! or , the holy blood , i will spit you all like ortolans ! "
unfortunately , there was one circumstance which created a powerful obstacle to the accomplishment of this threat ; which was , as we have related , that his sword had been in his first conflict broken in two , and which he had entirely forgotten .
hence , it resulted when dartagnan proceeded to draw his sword in earnest , he found himself purely and simply armed with a stump of a sword about eight or ten inches in length , which the host had carefully placed in the scabbard .
as to the rest of the blade , the master had slyly put that on one side to make himself a larding pin .
but this deception would probably not have stopped our fiery young man if the host had not reflected that the reclamation which his guest made was perfectly just .
" but , after all , " said he , lowering the point of his spit , " where is this letter ? "
" yes , where is this letter ? " cried dartagnan . " in the first place , i warn you that that letter is for monsieur de treville , and it must be found , he will know how to find it . "
his threat completed the intimidation of the host .
after the king and the cardinal , m. de treville was the man whose name was perhaps most frequently repeated by the military , and even by citizens .
there was , to be sure , father joseph , but his name was never pronounced but with a subdued voice , such was the terror inspired by his gray eminence , as the cardinal s familiar was called .
throwing down his spit , and ordering his wife to do the same with her broom handle , and the servants with their sticks , he set the first example of commencing an earnest search for the lost letter .
" does the letter contain anything valuable ? " demanded the host , after a few minutes of useless investigation . " zounds !
i think it does indeed ! " cried the gascon , who reckoned upon this letter for making his way at court . " it contained my fortune ! "
" bills upon spain ? " asked the disturbed host .
" bills upon his majesty s private treasury , " answered dartagnan , who , reckoning upon entering into the king s service in consequence of this recommendation , believed he could make this somewhat hazardous reply without telling of a falsehood .
" the devil ! " cried the host , at his wit s end .
" but it s of no importance , " continued dartagnan , with natural assurance ; " it s of no importance . the money is nothing ; that letter was everything .
i would rather have lost a thousand pistoles than have lost it . "
a ray of light all at once broke upon the mind of the host as he was giving himself to the devil upon finding nothing .
" that letter is not lost ! " cried he .
" what ! " cried dartagnan .
" no , it has been stolen from you . "
" stolen ? by whom ? "
" by the gentleman who was here yesterday .
he came down into the kitchen , where your doublet was .
he remained there some time alone .
i would lay a wager he has stolen it . "
" do you say , " resumed dartagnan , " that you suspect that impertinent gentleman ? "
" then that s my thief , " replied dartagnan . " i will complain to monsieur de treville , and monsieur de treville will complain to the king . "
he then drew two crowns majestically from his purse and gave them to the host , who accompanied him , cap in hand , to the gate , and remounted his yellow horse , which bore him without any further accident to the gate of st . antoine at paris , where his owner sold him for three crowns , which was a very good price , considering that dartagnan had ridden him hard during the last stage .
thus the dealer to whom dartagnan sold him for the nine livres did not conceal from the young man that he only gave that enormous sum for him on the account of the originality of his color .
thus dartagnan entered paris on foot , carrying his little packet under his arm , and walked about till he found an apartment to be let on terms suited to the scantiness of his means .
this chamber was a sort of garret , situated in the rue des fossoyeurs , near the luxembourg .
after this , satisfied with the way in which he had conducted himself at meung , without remorse for the past , confident in the present , and full of hope for the future , he retired to bed and slept the sleep of the brave .
this sleep , provincial as it was , brought him to nine oclock in the morning ; at which hour he rose , in order to repair to the residence of m. de treville , the third personage in the kingdom , in the paternal estimation .
2 the antechamber of m. de treville
his insolent bravery , his still more insolent success at a time when blows poured down like hail , had borne him to the top of that difficult ladder called court favor , which he had climbed four steps at a time .
he was the friend of the king , who honored highly , as everyone knows , the memory of his father , henry iv .
thanks to this double gift and the spotless name that accompanied it , m. de treville was admitted into the household of the young prince where he made such good use of his sword , and was so faithful to his motto , that louis xiii , one of the good blades of his kingdom , was accustomed to say that if he had a friend who was about to fight , he would advise him to choose as a second , himself first , and treville next -- or even , perhaps , before himself .
thus louis xiii had a real liking for treville -- a royal liking , a self - interested liking , it is true , but still a liking .
at that unhappy period it was an important consideration to be surrounded by such men as treville .
many might take for their device the epithet strong , which formed the second part of his motto , but very few gentlemen could lay claim to the faithful , which constituted the first . treville was one of these latter .
at last louis xiii made treville the captain of his musketeers , who were to louis xiii in devotedness , or rather in fanaticism , what his ordinaries had been to henry iii , and his scotch guard to louis xi .
on his part , the cardinal was not behind the king in this respect .
when he saw the formidable and chosen body with which louis xiii had surrounded himself , this second , or rather this first king of france , became desirous that he , too , should have his guard .
he had his musketeers therefore , as louis xiii had his , and these two powerful rivals vied with each other in procuring , not only from all the provinces of france , but even from all foreign states , the most celebrated swordsmen .
it was not uncommon for richelieu and louis xiii to dispute over their evening game of chess upon the merits of their servants .
we learn this from the memoirs of a man who was concerned in some few of these defeats and in many of these victories .
treville had grasped the weak side of his master ; and it was to this address that he owed the long and constant favor of a king who has not left the reputation behind him of being very faithful in his friendships .
he paraded his musketeers before the cardinal armand duplessis with an insolent air which made the gray moustache of his eminence curl with ire .
treville understood admirably the war method of that period , in which he who could not live at the expense of the enemy must live at the expense of his compatriots . his soldiers formed a legion of devil - may - care fellows , perfectly undisciplined toward all but himself .
m de treville employed this powerful weapon for the king , in the first place , and the friends of the king -- and then for himself and his own friends .
for the rest , in the memoirs of this period , which has left so many memoirs , one does not find this worthy gentleman blamed even by his enemies ; and he had many such among men of the pen as well as among men of the sword . in no instance , let us say , was this worthy gentleman accused of deriving personal advantage from the cooperation of his minions .
endowed with a rare genius for intrigue which rendered him the equal of the ablest intriguers , he remained an honest man .
still further , in spite of sword thrusts which weaken , and painful exercises which fatigue , he had become one of the most gallant frequenters of revels , one of the most insinuating lady s men , one of the softest whisperers of interesting nothings of his day ; the bonnes fortunes of de treville were talked of as those of m. de bassompierre had been talked of twenty years before , and that was not saying a little .
the captain of the musketeers was therefore admired , feared , and loved ; and this constitutes the zenith of human fortune .
louis xiv absorbed all the smaller stars of his court in his own vast radiance ; but his father , a sun pluribus impar , left his personal splendor to each of his favorites , his individual value to each of his courtiers .
the court of his hotel , situated in the rue du vieux - colombier , resembled a camp from by six oclock in the morning in summer and eight oclock in winter . from fifty to sixty musketeers , who appeared to replace one another in order always to present an imposing number , paraded constantly , armed to the teeth and ready for anything .
on one of those immense staircases , upon whose space modern civilization would build a whole house , ascended and descended the office seekers of paris , who ran after any sort of favor -- gentlemen from the provinces anxious to be enrolled , and servants in all sorts of liveries , bringing and carrying messages between their masters and m. de treville .
in the antechamber , upon long circular benches , reposed the elect ; that is to say , those who were called .
in this apartment a continued buzzing prevailed from morning till night , while m. de treville , in his office contiguous to this antechamber , received visits , listened to complaints , gave his orders , and like the king in his balcony at the louvre , had only to place himself at the window to review both his men and arms .
the day on which dartagnan presented himself the assemblage was imposing , particularly for a provincial just arriving from his province . it is true that this provincial was a gascon ; and that , particularly at this period , the compatriots of dartagnan had the reputation of not being easily intimidated .
when he had once passed the massive door covered with long square - headed nails , he fell into the midst of a troop of swordsmen , who crossed one another in their passage , calling out , quarreling , and playing tricks one with another .
in order to make one s way amid these turbulent and conflicting waves , it was necessary to be an officer , a great noble , or a pretty woman .
it was , then , into the midst of this tumult and disorder that our young man advanced with a beating heat , ranging his long rapier up his lanky leg , and keeping one hand on the edge of his cap , with that half - smile of the embarrassed a provincial who wishes to put on a good face .
arrived at the staircase , it was still worse . there were four musketeers on the bottom steps , amusing themselves with the following exercise , while ten or twelve of their comrades waited upon the landing place to take their turn in the sport .
one of them , stationed upon the top stair , naked sword in hand , prevented , or at least endeavored to prevent , the three others from ascending .
these three others fenced against him with their agile swords .
dartagnan at first took these weapons for foils , and believed them to be buttoned ; but he soon perceived by certain scratches that every weapon was pointed and sharpened , and that at each of these scratches not only the spectators , but even the actors themselves , laughed like so many madmen .
he who at the moment occupied the upper step kept his adversaries marvelously in check .
in five minutes three were slightly wounded , one on the hand , another on the ear , by the defender of the stair , who himself remained intact -- a piece of skill which was worth to him , according to the rules agreed upon , three turns of favor .
however difficult it might be , or rather as he pretended it was , to astonish our young traveler , this pastime really astonished him . he had seen in his province -- that land in which heads become so easily heated -- a few of the preliminaries of duels ; but the daring of these four fencers appeared to him the strongest he had ever heard of even in gascony .
he believed himself transported into that famous country of giants into which gulliver afterward went and was so frightened ; and yet he had not gained the goal , for there were still the landing place and the antechamber .
on the landing they were no longer fighting , but amused themselves with stories about women , and in the antechamber , with stories about the court .
on the landing dartagnan blushed ; in the antechamber he trembled .
his warm and fickle imagination , which in gascony had rendered formidable to young chambermaids , and even sometimes their mistresses , had never dreamed , even in moments of delirium , of half the amorous wonders or a quarter of the feats of gallantry which were here set forth in connection with names the best known and with details the least concealed .
but if his morals were shocked on the landing , his respect for the cardinal was scandalized in the antechamber .
" certes , these fellows will all either be imprisoned or hanged , " thought the terrified dartagnan , " and i , no doubt , with them ; for from the moment i have either listened to or heard them , i shall be held as an accomplice .
we have no need , therefore , to say that dartagnan dared not join in the conversation , only he looked with all his eyes and listened with all his ears , stretching his five senses so as to lose nothing ; and despite his confidence on the paternal admonitions , he felt himself carried by his tastes and led by his instincts to praise rather than to blame the unheard - of things which were taking place .
although he was a perfect stranger in the court of m. de treville s courtiers , and this his first appearance in that place , he was at length noticed , and somebody came and asked him what he wanted .
at this demand dartagnan gave his name very modestly , emphasized the title of compatriot , and begged the servant who had put the question to him to request a moment s audience of m. de treville -- a request which the other , with an air of protection , promised to transmit in due season .
dartagnan , a little recovered from his first surprise , had now leisure to study costumes and physiognomy .
the center of the most animated group was a musketeer of great height and haughty countenance , dressed in a costume so peculiar as to attract general attention .
a long cloak of crimson velvet fell in graceful folds from his shoulders , disclosing in front the splendid baldric , from which was suspended a gigantic rapier .
this musketeer had just come off guard , complained of having a cold , and coughed from time to time affectedly .
it was for this reason , as he said to those around him , that he had put on his cloak ; and while he spoke with a lofty air and twisted his mustache disdainfully , all admired his embroidered baldric , and dartagnan more than anyone .
" what would you have ? " said the musketeer . " this fashion is coming in . it is a folly , i admit , but still it is the fashion .
besides , one must lay out one s inheritance somehow . "
" ah , porthos ! " cried one of his companions , " do nt try to make us believe you obtained that baldric by paternal generosity . it was given to you by that veiled lady i met you with the other sunday , near the gate st . honor . "
" no , upon honor and by the faith of a gentleman , i bought it with the contents of my own purse , " answered he whom they designated by the name porthos .
" yes ; about in the same manner , " said another musketeer , " that i bought this new purse with what my mistress put into the old one . "
" it s true , though , " said porthos ; " and the proof is that i paid twelve pistoles for it . "
the wonder was increased , though the doubt continued to exist .
" is it not true , aramis ? " said porthos , turning toward another musketeer .
habitually he spoke little and slowly , bowed frequently , laughed without noise , showing his teeth , which were fine and of which , as the rest of his person , he appeared to take great care .
he answered the appeal of his friend by an affirmative nod of the head .
this affirmation appeared to dispel all doubts with regard to the baldric . they continued to admire it , but said no more about it ; and with a rapid change of thought , the conversation passed suddenly to another subject .
" what do you think of the story chalais s esquire relates ? " asked another musketeer , without addressing anyone in particular , but on the contrary speaking to everybody .
" and what does he say ? " asked porthos , in a self - sufficient tone .
" he relates that he met at brussels rochefort , the ame damnee of the cardinal disguised as a capuchin , and that this cursed rochefort , thanks to his disguise , had tricked monsieur de laigues , like a ninny as he is . "
" a ninny , indeed ! " said porthos ; " but is the matter certain ? "
" i had it from aramis , " replied the musketeer .
" indeed ? "
" why , you knew it , porthos , " said aramis . " i told you of it yesterday . let us say no more about it . "
" say no more about it ? that s your opinion ! " replied porthos .
peste ! you come to your conclusions quickly .
what ! the cardinal sets a spy upon a gentleman , has his letters stolen from him by means of a traitor , a brigand , a rascal - has , with the help of this spy and thanks to this correspondence , chalais s throat cut , under the stupid pretext that he wanted to kill the king and marry monsieur to the queen !
" well , then , let us talk about it , since you desire it , " replied aramis , patiently .
" this rochefort , " cried porthos , " if i were the esquire of poor chalais , should pass a minute or two very uncomfortably with me . "
" and you -- you would pass rather a sad quarter - hour with the red duke , " replied aramis . " oh , the red duke !
" the red duke is capital .
i ll circulate that saying , be assured , my dear fellow .
who says this aramis is not a wit ?
what a misfortune it is you did not follow your first vocation ; what a delicious abbe you would have made ! "
" oh , it s only a temporary postponement , " replied aramis ; " i shall be one someday . you very well know , porthos , that i continue to study theology for that purpose . "
" he will be one , as he says , " cried porthos ; " he will be one , sooner or later . "
" sooner . " said aramis .
" he only waits for one thing to determine him to resume his cassock , which hangs behind his uniform , " said another musketeer .
" what is he waiting for ? " asked another .
" only till the queen has given an heir to the crown of france . "
" no jesting upon that subject , gentlemen , " said porthos ; " thank god the queen is still of an age to give one ! "
" they say that monsieur de buckingham is in france , " replied aramis , with a significant smile which gave to this sentence , apparently so simple , a tolerably scandalous meaning .
" aramis , my good friend , this time you are wrong , " interrupted porthos . " your wit is always leading you beyond bounds ; if monsieur de treville heard you , you would repent of speaking thus . "
" are you going to give me a lesson , porthos ? " cried aramis , from whose usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning .
" my dear fellow , be a musketeer or an abbe .
be one or the other , but not both , " replied porthos .
" you know what athos told you the other day ; you eat at everybody s mess .
ah , do nt be angry , i beg of you , that would be useless ; you know what is agreed upon between you , athos and me .
you go to madame daguillon s , and you pay your court to her ; you go to madame de bois - tracy s , the cousin of madame de chevreuse , and you pass for being far advanced in the good graces of that lady . oh , good lord !
do nt trouble yourself to reveal your good luck ; no one asks for your secret - all the world knows your discretion .
but since you possess that virtue , why the devil do nt you make use of it with respect to her majesty ? let whoever likes talk of the king and the cardinal , and how he likes ; but the queen is sacred , and if anyone speaks of her , let it be respectfully . "
" porthos , you are as vain as narcissus ; i plainly tell you so , " replied aramis . " you know i hate moralizing , except when it is done by athos .
in the meanwhile i am a musketeer ; in that quality i say what i please , and at this moment it pleases me to say that you weary me . "
" aramis ! "
" porthos ! "
" gentlemen ! gentlemen ! " cried the surrounding group .
" monsieur de treville awaits monsieur dartagnan , " cried a servant , throwing open the door of the cabinet .
at this announcement , during which the door remained open , everyone became mute , and amid the general silence the young man crossed part of the length of the antechamber , and entered the apartment of the captain of the musketeers , congratulating himself with all his heart at having so narrowly escaped the end of this strange quarrel .
3 the audience
m de treville was at the moment in rather ill - humor , nevertheless he saluted the young man politely , who bowed to the very ground ; and he smiled on receiving dartagnan s response , the bearnese accent of which recalled to him at the same time his youth and his country -- a double remembrance which makes a man smile at all ages ; but stepping toward the antechamber and making a sign to dartagnan with his hand , as if to ask his permission to finish with others before he began with him , he called three times , with a louder voice at each time , so that he ran through the intervening tones between the imperative accent and the angry accent .
" athos !
porthos !
aramis ! "
the two musketeers with whom we have already made acquaintance , and who answered to the last of these three names , immediately quitted the group of which they had formed a part , and advanced toward the cabinet , the door of which closed after them as soon as they had entered .
their appearance , although it was not quite at ease , excited by its carelessness , at once full of dignity and submission , the admiration of dartagnan , who beheld in these two men demigods , and in their leader an olympian jupiter , armed with all his thunders .
" no , " replied the two musketeers , after a moment s silence , " no , sir , we do not . "
" because he plainly perceives that his piquette * stands in need of being enlivened by a mixture of good wine . "
a watered liquor , made from the second pressing of the grape .
" yes , yes , " continued m. de treville , growing warmer as he spoke , " and his majesty was right ; for , upon my honor , it is true that the musketeers make but a miserable figure at court .
the cardinal related yesterday while playing with the king , with an air of condolence very displeasing to me , that the day before yesterday those damned musketeers , those daredevils -- he dwelt upon those words with an ironical tone still more displeasing to me -- those braggarts , added he , glancing at me with his tiger - cat s eye , had made a riot in the rue ferou in a cabaret , and that a party of his guards ( i thought he was going to laugh in my face ) had been forced to arrest the rioters !
morbleu ! you must know something about it .
you were among them -- you were !
but it s all my fault ; yes , it s all my fault , because it is myself who selects my men .
you , aramis , why the devil did you ask me for a uniform when you would have been so much better in a cassock ?
and you , porthos , do you only wear such a fine golden baldric to suspend a sword of straw from it ?
and athos -- i do nt see athos .
where is he ? "
" ill-- " " very ill , say you ?
and of what malady ? "
" it is feared that it may be the smallpox , sir , " replied porthos , desirous of taking his turn in the conversation ; " and what is serious is that it will certainly spoil his face . "
" the smallpox !
that s a great story to tell me , porthos !
sick of the smallpox at his age !
no , no ; but wounded without doubt , killed , perhaps .
to save yourselves , to scamper away , to flee -- that is good for the king s musketeers ! "
porthos and aramis trembled with rage .
they could willingly have strangled m. de treville , if , at the bottom of all this , they had not felt it was the great love he bore them which made him speak thus .
they stamped upon the carpet with their feet ; they bit their lips till the blood came , and grasped the hilts of their swords with all their might .
all without had heard , as we have said , athos , porthos , and aramis called , and had guessed , from m. de treville s tone of voice , that he was very angry about something .
ten curious heads were glued to the tapestry and became pale with fury ; for their ears , closely applied to the door , did not lose a syllable of what he said , while their mouths repeated as he went on , the insulting expressions of the captain to all the people in the antechamber .
in an instant , from the door of the cabinet to the street gate , the whole hotel was boiling . " ah !
the king s musketeers are arrested by the guards of the cardinal , are they ? " continued m. de treville , as furious at heart as his soldiers , but emphasizing his words and plunging them , one by one , so to say , like so many blows of a stiletto , into the bosoms of his auditors . " what !
six of his eminence s guards arrest six of his majesty s musketeers !
morbleu ! my part is taken !
i will go straight to the louvre ; i will give in my resignation as captain of the king s musketeers to take a lieutenancy in the cardinal s guards , and if he refuses me , morbleu ! i will turn abbe . "
at these words , the murmur without became an explosion ; nothing was to be heard but oaths and blasphemies .
the morbleus , the sang dieus , the morts touts les diables , crossed one another in the air .
dartagnan looked for some tapestry behind which he might hide himself , and felt an immense inclination to crawl under the table .
" well , my captain , " said porthos , quite beside himself , " the truth is that we were six against six . but we were not captured by fair means ; and before we had time to draw our swords , two of our party were dead , and athos , grievously wounded , was very little better . for you know athos .
well , captain , he endeavored twice to get up , and fell again twice . and we did not surrender -- no !
on the way we escaped .
as for athos , they believed him to be dead , and left him very quiet on the field of battle , not thinking it worth the trouble to carry him away .
that s the whole story .
what the devil , captain , one can not win all one s battles !
the great pompey lost that of pharsalia ; and francis the first , who was , as i have heard say , as good as other folks , nevertheless lost the battle of pavia . "
" and i have the honor of assuring you that i killed one of them with his own sword , " said aramis ; " for mine was broken at the first parry .
killed him , or poniarded him , sir , as is most agreeable to you . "
" i did not know that , " replied m. de treville , in a somewhat softened tone .
" the cardinal exaggerated , as i perceive . "
" but pray , sir , " continued aramis , who , seeing his captain become appeased , ventured to risk a prayer , " do not say that athos is wounded . he would be in despair if that should come to the ears of the king ; and as the wound is very serious , seeing that after crossing the shoulder it penetrates into the chest , it is to be feared-- "
at this instant the tapestry was raised and a noble and handsome head , but frightfully pale , appeared under the fringe .
" athos ! " cried the two musketeers .
" athos ! " repeated m. de treville himself .
" you have sent for me , sir , " said athos to m. de treville , in a feeble yet perfectly calm voice , " you have sent for me , as my comrades inform me , and i have hastened to receive your orders . i am here ; what do you want with me ? "
and at these words , the musketeer , in irreproachable costume , belted as usual , with a tolerably firm step , entered the cabinet .
m. de treville , moved to the bottom of his heart by this proof of courage , sprang toward him .
" i was about to say to these gentlemen , " added he , " that i forbid my musketeers to expose their lives needlessly ; for brave men are very dear to the king , and the king knows that his musketeers are the bravest on the earth .
your hand , athos ! "
the door had remained open , so strong was the excitement produced by the arrival of athos , whose wound , though kept as a secret , was known to all .
a burst of satisfaction hailed the last words of the captain ; and two or three heads , carried away by the enthusiasm of the moment , appeared through the openings of the tapestry .
m. de treville was about to reprehend this breach of the rules of etiquette , when he felt the hand of athos , who had rallied all his energies to contend against pain , at length overcome by it , fell upon the floor as if he were dead .
" a surgeon ! " cried m. de treville , " mine !
the king s ! the best !
a surgeon ! or , sblood , my brave athos will die ! "
at the cries of m. de treville , the whole assemblage rushed into the cabinet , he not thinking to shut the door against anyone , and all crowded round the wounded man .
but all this eager attention might have been useless if the doctor so loudly called for had not chanced to be in the hotel . he pushed through the crowd , approached athos , still insensible , and as all this noise and commotion inconvenienced him greatly , he required , as the first and most urgent thing , that the musketeer should be carried into an adjoining chamber .
immediately m. de treville opened and pointed the way to porthos and aramis , who bore their comrade in their arms .
behind this group walked the surgeon ; and behind the surgeon the door closed .
the cabinet of m. de treville , generally held so sacred , became in an instant the annex of the antechamber .
everyone spoke , harangued , and vociferated , swearing , cursing , and consigning the cardinal and his guards to all the devils .
an instant after , porthos and aramis re - entered , the surgeon and m. de treville alone remaining with the wounded .
at length , m. de treville himself returned .
the injured man had recovered his senses . the surgeon declared that the situation of the musketeer had nothing in it to render his friends uneasy , his weakness having been purely and simply caused by loss of blood .
then m. de treville made a sign with his hand , and all retired except dartagnan , who did not forget that he had an audience , and with the tenacity of a gascon remained in his place .
when all had gone out and the door was closed , m. de treville , on turning round , found himself alone with the young man .
the event which had occurred had in some degree broken the thread of his ideas .
he inquired what was the will of his persevering visitor . dartagnan then repeated his name , and in an instant recovering all his remembrances of the present and the past , m. de treville grasped the situation .
" pardon me , " said he , smiling , " pardon me my dear compatriot , but i had wholly forgotten you .
soldiers are big children ; but as i maintain that the orders of the king , and more particularly the orders of the cardinal , should be executed-- "
dartagnan could not restrain a smile . by this smile m. de treville judged that he had not to deal with a fool , and changing the conversation , came straight to the point .
" i respected your father very much , " said he .
" what can i do for the son ? tell me quickly ; my time is not my own . "
" it is indeed a favor , young man , " replied m. de treville , " but it may not be so far beyond your hopes as you believe , or rather as you appear to believe .
dartagnan bowed without replying , feeling his desire to don the musketeer s uniform vastly increased by the great difficulties which preceded the attainment of it .
" but , " continued m. de treville , fixing upon his compatriot a look so piercing that it might be said he wished to read the thoughts of his heart , " on account of my old companion , your father , as i have said , i will do something for you , young man .
our recruits from bearn are not generally very rich , and i have no reason to think matters have much changed in this respect since i left the province .
i dare say you have not brought too large a stock of money with you ? "
dartagnan drew himself up with a proud air which plainly said , " i ask alms of no man . "
dartagnan s bearing became still more imposing . thanks to the sale of his horse , he commenced his career with four more crowns than m. de treville possessed at the commencement of his .
" you ought , i say , then , to husband the means you have , however large the sum may be ; but you ought also to endeavor to perfect yourself in the exercises becoming a gentleman .
i will write a letter today to the director of the royal academy , and tomorrow he will admit you without any expense to yourself .
do not refuse this little service .
our best - born and richest gentlemen sometimes solicit it without being able to obtain it .
dartagnan , stranger as he was to all the manners of a court , could not but perceive a little coldness in this reception .
" alas , sir , " said he , " i can not but perceive how sadly i miss the letter of introduction which my father gave me to present to you . "
" i certainly am surprised , " replied m. de treville , " that you should undertake so long a journey without that necessary passport , the sole resource of us poor bearnese . "
" i had one , sir , and , thank god , such as i could wish , " cried dartagnan ; " but it was perfidiously stolen from me . "
he then related the adventure of meung , described the unknown gentleman with the greatest minuteness , and all with a warmth and truthfulness that delighted m. de treville .
" this is all very strange , " said m. de treville , after meditating a minute ; " you mentioned my name , then , aloud ? "
flattery was at that period very current , and m. de treville loved incense as well as a king , or even a cardinal .
he could not refrain from a smile of visible satisfaction ; but this smile soon disappeared , and returning to the adventure of meung , " tell me , " continued he , " had not this gentlemen a slight scar on his cheek ? "
" yes , such a one as would be made by the grazing of a ball . "
" was he not a fine - looking man ? "
" yes . "
" of lofty stature . "
" yes . "
" of complexion and brown hair ? "
" yes , yes , that is he ; how is it , sir , that you are acquainted with this man ?
if i ever find him again -- and i will find him , i swear , were it in hell ! "
" he was waiting for a woman , " continued treville .
" he departed immediately after having conversed for a minute with her whom he awaited . "
" you know not the subject of their conversation ? "
" was this woman english ? "
" he called her milady . "
" it is he ; it must be he ! " murmured treville . " i believed him still at brussels . "
" oh , sir , if you know who this man is , " cried dartagnan , " tell me who he is , and whence he is . i will then release you from all your promises -- even that of procuring my admission into the musketeers ; for before everything , i wish to avenge myself . "
" beware , young man ! " cried treville . " if you see him coming on one side of the street , pass by on the other .
do not cast yourself against such a rock ; he would break you like glass . "
" that will not prevent me , " replied dartagnan , " if ever i find him . "
" in the meantime , " said treville , " seek him not -- if i have a right to advise you . "
all at once the captain stopped , as if struck by a sudden suspicion .
he fixed his eyes upon dartagnan even more earnestly than before .
he was moderately reassured however , by the aspect of that countenance , full of astute intelligence and affected humility .
" i know he is a gascon , " reflected he , " but he may be one for the cardinal as well as for me .
let us try him . "
" my friend , " said he , slowly , " i wish , as the son of an ancient friend -- for i consider this story of the lost letter perfectly true -- i wish , i say , in order to repair the coldness you may have remarked in my reception of you , to discover to you the secrets of our policy .
the king and the cardinal are the best of friends ; their apparent bickerings are only feints to deceive fools .
i am not willing that a compatriot , a handsome cavalier , a brave youth , quite fit to make his way , should become the dupe of all these artifices and fall into the snare after the example of so many others who have been ruined by it .
be assured that i am devoted to both these all - powerful masters , and that my earnest endeavors have no other aim than the service of the king , and also the cardinal -- one of the most illustrious geniuses that france has ever produced .
" now , young man , regulate your conduct accordingly ; and if you entertain , whether from your family , your relations , or even from your instincts , any of these enmities which we see constantly breaking out against the cardinal , bid me adieu and let us separate .
i will aid you in many ways , but without attaching you to my person .
i hope that my frankness at least will make you my friend ; for you are the only young man to whom i have hitherto spoken as i have done to you . "
treville said to himself : " if the cardinal has set this young fox upon me , he will certainly not have failed -- he , who knows how bitterly i execrate him -- to tell his spy that the best means of making his court to me is to rail at him . therefore , in spite of all my protestations , if it be as i suspect , my cunning gossip will assure me that he holds his eminence in horror . "
it , however , proved otherwise . dartagnan answered , with the greatest simplicity :
" i came to paris with exactly such intentions .
my father advised me to stoop to nobody but the king , the cardinal , and yourself -- whom he considered the first three personages in france . "
dartagnan added m. de treville to the others , as may be perceived ; but he thought this addition would do no harm .
" i have the greatest veneration for the cardinal , " continued he , " and the most profound respect for his actions .
m de treville was surprised to the greatest degree .
my hotel will be always open to you .
hereafter , being able to ask for me at all hours , and consequently to take advantage of all opportunities , you will probably obtain that which you desire . "
" that is to say , " replied dartagnan , " that you will wait until i have proved myself worthy of it .
well , be assured , " added he , with the familiarity of a gascon , " you shall not wait long . "
and he bowed in order to retire , and as if he considered the future in his own hands .
" i promised you a letter for the director of the academy .
m de treville smiled at this flourish ; and leaving his young man compatriot in the embrasure of the window , where they had talked together , he seated himself at a table in order to write the promised letter of recommendation .
while he was doing this , dartagnan , having no better employment , amused himself with beating a march upon the window and with looking at the musketeers , who went away , one after another , following them with his eyes until they disappeared .
m de treville , after having written the letter , sealed it , and rising , approached the young man in order to give it to him . but at the very moment when dartagnan stretched out his hand to receive it , m. de treville was highly astonished to see his protege make a sudden spring , become crimson with passion , and rush from the cabinet crying , " sblood , he shall not escape me this time ! "
" and who ? " asked m. de treville .
" he , my thief ! " replied dartagnan .
" ah , the traitor ! " and he disappeared .
" the devil take the madman ! " murmured m. de treville , " unless , " added he , " this is a cunning mode of escaping , seeing that he had failed in his purpose ! "
4 the shoulder of athos , the baldric of porthos and the handkerchief of aramis
dartagnan , in a state of fury , crossed the antechamber at three bounds , and was darting toward the stairs , which he reckoned upon descending four at a time , when , in his heedless course , he ran head foremost against a musketeer who was coming out of one of m. de treville s private rooms , and striking his shoulder violently , made him utter a cry , or rather a howl .
" excuse me , " said dartagnan , endeavoring to resume his course , " excuse me , but i am in a hurry . "
scarcely had he descended the first stair , when a hand of iron seized him by the belt and stopped him .
not at all my young man .
do you fancy because you have heard monsieur de treville speak to us a little cavalierly today that other people are to treat us as he speaks to us ?
undeceive yourself , comrade , you are not monsieur de treville . "
" my faith ! " replied dartagnan , recognizing athos , who , after the dressing performed by the doctor , was returning to his own apartment . " i did not do it intentionally , and not doing it intentionally , i said  excuse me . 
it appears to me that this is quite enough .
i repeat to you , however , and this time on my word of honor -- i think perhaps too often -- that i am in haste , great haste .
leave your hold , then , i beg of you , and let me go where my business calls me . "
" monsieur , " said athos , letting him go , " you are not polite ; it is easy to perceive that you come from a distance . "
dartagnan had already strode down three or four stairs , but at athos s last remark he stopped short .
" morbleu , monsieur ! " said he , " however far i may come , it is not you who can give me a lesson in good manners , i warn you . "
" perhaps , " said athos .
" ah ! if i were not in such haste , and if i were not running after someone , " said dartagnan .
" monsieur man - in - a - hurry , you can find me without running -- me , you understand ? "
" and where , i pray you ? "
" near the carmes - deschaux . "
" at what hour ? "
" about noon ? that will do ; i will be there . "
" good ! " cried dartagnan , " i will be there ten minutes before twelve . "
and he set off running as if the devil possessed him , hoping that he might yet find the stranger , whose slow pace could not have carried him far .
but at the street gate , porthos was talking with the soldier on guard .
between the two talkers there was just enough room for a man to pass .
dartagnan thought it would suffice for him , and he sprang forward like a dart between them .
but dartagnan had reckoned without the wind . as he was about to pass , the wind blew out porthos s long cloak , and dartagnan rushed straight into the middle of it .
without doubt , porthos had reasons for not abandoning this part of his vestments , for instead of quitting his hold on the flap in his hand , he pulled it toward him , so that dartagnan rolled himself up in the velvet by a movement of rotation explained by the persistency of porthos .
dartagnan , hearing the musketeer swear , wished to escape from the cloak , which blinded him , and sought to find his way from under the folds of it .
he was particularly anxious to avoid marring the freshness of the magnificent baldric we are acquainted with ; but on timidly opening his eyes , he found himself with his nose fixed between the two shoulders of porthos -- that is to say , exactly upon the baldric .
alas , like most things in this world which have nothing in their favor but appearances , the baldric was glittering with gold in the front , but was nothing but simple buff behind .
vainglorious as he was , porthos could not afford to have a baldric wholly of gold , but had at least half . one could comprehend the necessity of the cold and the urgency of the cloak .
" bless me ! " cried porthos , making strong efforts to disembarrass himself of dartagnan , who was wriggling about his back ; " you must be mad to run against people in this manner . "
" excuse me , " said dartagnan , reappearing under the shoulder of the giant , " but i am in such haste -- i was running after someone and-- "
" and do you always forget your eyes when you run ? " asked porthos .
" no , " replied dartagnan , piqued , " and thanks to my eyes , i can see what other people can not see . "
whether porthos understood him or did not understand him , giving way to his anger , " monsieur , " said he , " you stand a chance of getting chastised if you rub musketeers in this fashion . " " chastised , monsieur ! " said dartagnan , " the expression is strong . "
" it is one that becomes a man accustomed to look his enemies in the face . "
" ah , pardieu ! i know full well that you do nt turn your back to yours . "
and the young man , delighted with his joke , went away laughing loudly .
porthos foamed with rage , and made a movement to rush after dartagnan .
" presently , presently , " cried the latter , " when you have nt your cloak on . "
" at one oclock , then , behind the luxembourg . "
" very well , at one oclock , then , " replied dartagnan , turning the angle of the street .
but neither in the street he had passed through , nor in the one which his eager glance pervaded , could he see anyone ; however slowly the stranger had walked , he was gone on his way , or perhaps had entered some house .
dartagnan inquired of everyone he met with , went down to the ferry , came up again by the rue de seine , and the red cross ; but nothing , absolutely nothing !
this chase was , however , advantageous to him in one sense , for in proportion as the perspiration broke from his forehead , his heart began to cool .
he began to reflect upon the events that had passed ; they were numerous and inauspicious . it was scarcely eleven oclock in the morning , and yet this morning had already brought him into disgrace with m. de treville , who could not fail to think the manner in which dartagnan had left him a little cavalier .
besides this , he had drawn upon himself two good duels with two men , each capable of killing three dartagnans -- with two musketeers , in short , with two of those beings whom he esteemed so greatly that he placed them in his mind and heart above all other men .
the outlook was sad .
sure of being killed by athos , it may easily be understood that the young man was not very uneasy about porthos .
as hope , however , is the last thing extinguished in the heart of man , he finished by hoping that he might survive , even though with terrible wounds , in both these duels ; and in case of surviving , he made the following reprehensions upon his own conduct :
" what a madcap i was , and what a stupid fellow i am !
that brave and unfortunate athos was wounded on that very shoulder against which i must run head foremost , like a ram .
the only thing that astonishes me is that he did not strike me dead at once . he had good cause to do so ; the pain i gave him must have been atrocious .
as to porthos -- oh , as to porthos , faith , that s a droll affair ! "
and in spite of himself , the young man began to laugh aloud , looking round carefully , however , to see that his solitary laugh , without a cause in the eyes of passers - by , offended no one .
" as to porthos , that is certainly droll ; but i am not the less a giddy fool .
are people to be run against without warning ? no ! and have i any right to go and peep under their cloaks to see what is not there ?
he would have pardoned me , he would certainly have pardoned me , if i had not said anything to him about that cursed baldric -- in ambiguous words , it is true , but rather drolly ambiguous .
ah , cursed gascon that i am , i get from one hobble into another .
friend dartagnan , " continued he , speaking to himself with all the amenity that he thought due himself , " if you escape , of which there is not much chance , i would advise you to practice perfect politeness for the future .
you must henceforth be admired and quoted as a model of it .
to be obliging and polite does not necessarily make a man a coward .
look at aramis , now ; aramis is mildness and grace personified .
well , did anybody ever dream of calling aramis a coward ?
no , certainly not , and from this moment i will endeavor to model myself after him .
ah ! that s strange !
here he is ! " dartagnan , walking and soliloquizing , had arrived within a few steps of the hotel darguillon and in front of that hotel perceived aramis , chatting gaily with three gentlemen ; but as he had not forgotten that it was in presence of this young man that m. de treville had been so angry in the morning , and as a witness of the rebuke the musketeers had received was not likely to be at all agreeable , he pretended not to see him .
dartagnan , on the contrary , quite full of his plans of conciliation and courtesy , approached the young men with a profound bow , accompanied by a most gracious smile .
all four , besides , immediately broke off their conversation .
dartagnan was not so dull as not to perceive that he was one too many ; but he was not sufficiently broken into the fashions of the gay world to know how to extricate himself gallantly from a false position , like that of a man who begins to mingle with people he is scarcely acquainted with and in a conversation that does not concern him .
this appeared to be a favorable opportunity to repair his intrusion .
the handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered , and had a coronet and arms at one of its corners .
aramis blushed excessively , and snatched rather than took the handkerchief from the hand of the gascon .
so saying , he pulled out his own handkerchief , likewise a very elegant handkerchief , and of fine cambric -- though cambric was dear at the period -- but a handkerchief without embroidery and without arms , only ornamented with a single cipher , that of its proprietor .
this time dartagnan was not hasty . he perceived his mistake ; but the friends of aramis were not at all convinced by his denial , and one of them addressed the young musketeer with affected seriousness .
" you make the demand badly , " replied aramis ; " and while acknowledging the justice of your reclamation , i refuse it on account of the form . "
" the fact is , " hazarded dartagnan , timidly , " i did not see the handkerchief fall from the pocket of monsieur aramis .
he had his foot upon it , that is all ; and i thought from having his foot upon it the handkerchief was his . "
" and you were deceived , my dear sir , " replied aramis , coldly , very little sensible to the reparation .
then turning toward that one of the guards who had declared himself the friend of bois - tracy , " besides , " continued he , " i have reflected , my dear intimate of bois - tracy , that i am not less tenderly his friend than you can possibly be ; so that decidedly this handkerchief is as likely to have fallen from your pocket as mine . "
" no , upon my honor ! " cried his majesty s guardsman .
" you are about to swear upon your honor and i upon my word , and then it will be pretty evident that one of us will have lied .
now , here , montaran , we will do better than that -- let each take a half . "
" of the handkerchief ? "
" yes . "
" perfectly just , " cried the other two guardsmen , " the judgment of king solomon !
aramis , you certainly are full of wisdom ! "
the young men burst into a laugh , and as may be supposed , the affair had no other sequel .
in a moment or two the conversation ceased , and the three guardsmen and the musketeer , after having cordially shaken hands , separated , the guardsmen going one way and aramis another .
" now is my time to make peace with this gallant man , " said dartagnan to himself , having stood on one side during the whole of the latter part of the conversation ; and with this good feeling drawing near to aramis , who was departing without paying any attention to him , " monsieur , " said he , " you will excuse me , i hope . "
" ah , monsieur , " interrupted aramis , " permit me to observe to you that you have not acted in this affair as a gallant man ought . "
" what , monsieur ! " cried dartagnan , " and do you suppose-- "
" i suppose , monsieur that you are not a fool , and that you knew very well , although coming from gascony , that people do not tread upon handkerchiefs without a reason .
what the devil !
paris is not paved with cambric ! "
" monsieur , you act wrongly in endeavoring to mortify me , " said dartagnan , in whom the natural quarrelsome spirit began to speak more loudly than his pacific resolutions .
" monsieur , what i say to you about the matter , " said aramis , " is not for the sake of seeking a quarrel .
thank god , i am not a bravo ! and being a musketeer but for a time , i only fight when i am forced to do so , and always with great repugnance ; but this time the affair is serious , for here is a lady compromised by you . "
" by us , you mean ! " cried dartagnan .
" why did you so maladroitly restore me the handkerchief ? "
" why did you so awkwardly let it fall ? "
" i have said , monsieur , and i repeat , that the handkerchief did not fall from my pocket . "
" and thereby you have lied twice , monsieur , for i saw it fall . "
" ah , you take it with that tone , do you , master gascon ? well , i will teach you how to behave yourself . "
" and i will send you back to your mass book , master abbe .
draw , if you please , and instantly-- "
" not so , if you please , my good friend -- not here , at least .
do you not perceive that we are opposite the hotel darguillon , which is full of the cardinal s creatures ?
how do i know that this is not his eminence who has honored you with the commission to procure my head ?
now , i entertain a ridiculous partiality for my head , it seems to suit my shoulders so correctly .
" i agree , monsieur ; but do not be too confident . take your handkerchief ; whether it belongs to you or another , you may perhaps stand in need of it . "
" monsieur is a gascon ? " asked aramis .
" yes .
monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence ? "
" prudence , monsieur , is a virtue sufficiently useless to musketeers , i know , but indispensable to churchmen ; and as i am only a musketeer provisionally , i hold it good to be prudent .
at two oclock i shall have the honor of expecting you at the hotel of monsieur de treville .
there i will indicate to you the best place and time . "
the two young men bowed and separated , aramis ascending the street which led to the luxembourg , while dartagnan , perceiving the appointed hour was approaching , took the road to the carmes - deschaux , saying to himself , " decidedly i ca nt draw back ; but at least , if i am killed , i shall be killed by a musketeer . "
5 the king s musketeers and the cardinal s guards
dartagnan was acquainted with nobody in paris .
he went therefore to his appointment with athos without a second , determined to be satisfied with those his adversary should choose .
besides , his intention was formed to make the brave musketeer all suitable apologies , but without meanness or weakness , fearing that might result from this duel which generally results from an affair of this kind , when a young and vigorous man fights with an adversary who is wounded and weakened -- if conquered , he doubles the triumph of his antagonist ; if a conqueror , he is accused of foul play and want of courage .
he hoped , by means of loyal excuses , to make a friend of athos , whose lordly air and austere bearing pleased him much .
in addition to this , dartagnan possessed that invincible stock of resolution which the counsels of his father had implanted in his heart : " endure nothing from anyone but the king , the cardinal , and monsieur de treville . "
he flew , then , rather than walked , toward the convent of the carmes dechausses , or rather deschaux , as it was called at that period , a sort of building without a window , surrounded by barren fields -- an accessory to the preaux - clercs , and which was generally employed as the place for the duels of men who had no time to lose .
when dartagnan arrived in sight of the bare spot of ground which extended along the foot of the monastery , athos had been waiting about five minutes , and twelve oclock was striking .
he was , then , as punctual as the samaritan woman , and the most rigorous casuist with regard to duels could have nothing to say .
athos , who still suffered grievously from his wound , though it had been dressed anew by m. de treville s surgeon , was seated on a post and waiting for his adversary with hat in hand , his feather even touching the ground .
" monsieur , " said athos , " i have engaged two of my friends as seconds ; but these two friends are not yet come , at which i am astonished , as it is not at all their custom . "
" i have no seconds on my part , monsieur , " said dartagnan ; " for having only arrived yesterday in paris , i as yet know no one but monsieur de treville , to whom i was recommended by my father , who has the honor to be , in some degree , one of his friends . "
athos reflected for an instant .
" you know no one but monsieur de treville ? " he asked .
" yes , monsieur , i know only him . "
" well , but then , " continued athos , speaking half to himself , " if i kill you , i shall have the air of a boy - slayer . "
" not too much so , " replied dartagnan , with a bow that was not deficient in dignity , " since you do me the honor to draw a sword with me while suffering from a wound which is very inconvenient . "
" very inconvenient , upon my word ; and you hurt me devilishly , i can tell you . but i will take the left hand -- it is my custom in such circumstances .
do not fancy that i do you a favor ; i use either hand easily . and it will be even a disadvantage to you ; a left - handed man is very troublesome to people who are not prepared for it .
i regret i did not inform you sooner of this circumstance . "
" you have truly , monsieur , " said dartagnan , bowing again , " a courtesy , for which , i assure you , i am very grateful . "
ah , sblood , how you have hurt me ! my shoulder quite burns . "
" if you would permit me-- " said dartagnan , with timidity .
" what , monsieur ? "
" i have a miraculous balsam for wounds -- a balsam given to me by my mother and of which i have made a trial upon myself . "
" well ? "
" well , i am sure that in less than three days this balsam would cure you ; and at the end of three days , when you would be cured -- well , sir , it would still do me a great honor to be your man . "
dartagnan spoke these words with a simplicity that did honor to his courtesy , without throwing the least doubt upon his courage .
" pardieu , monsieur ! " said athos , " that s a proposition that pleases me ; not that i can accept it , but a league off it savors of the gentleman .
thus spoke and acted the gallant knights of the time of charlemagne , in whom every cavalier ought to seek his model .
unfortunately , we do not live in the times of the great emperor , we live in the times of the cardinal ; and three days hence , however well the secret might be guarded , it would be known , i say , that we were to fight , and our combat would be prevented .
i think these fellows will never come . "
" if you are in haste , monsieur , " said dartagnan , with the same simplicity with which a moment before he had proposed to him to put off the duel for three days , " and if it be your will to dispatch me at once , do not inconvenience yourself , i pray you . "
monsieur , i love men of your kidney ; and i foresee plainly that if we do nt kill each other , i shall hereafter have much pleasure in your conversation .
we will wait for these gentlemen , so please you ; i have plenty of time , and it will be more correct .
ah , here is one of them , i believe . "
in fact , at the end of the rue vaugirard the gigantic porthos appeared .
" what ! " cried dartagnan , " is your first witness monsieur porthos ? "
" yes , that disturbs you ? "
" by no means . "
" and here is the second . "
dartagnan turned in the direction pointed to by athos , and perceived aramis .
" what ! " cried he , in an accent of greater astonishment than before , " your second witness is monsieur aramis ? "
" doubtless ! are you not aware that we are never seen one without the others , and that we are called among the musketeers and the guards , at court and in the city , athos , porthos , and aramis , or the three inseparables ?
and yet , as you come from dax or pau-- "
" from tarbes , " said dartagnan .
" it is probable you are ignorant of this little fact , " said athos .
" my faith ! " replied dartagnan , " you are well named , gentlemen ; and my adventure , if it should make any noise , will prove at least that your union is not founded upon contrasts . "
in the meantime , porthos had come up , waved his hand to athos , and then turning toward dartagnan , stood quite astonished .
let us say in passing that he had changed his baldric and relinquished his cloak .
" ah , ah ! " said he , " what does this mean ? "
" this is the gentleman i am going to fight with , " said athos , pointing to dartagnan with his hand and saluting him with the same gesture .
" why , it is with him i am also going to fight , " said porthos .
" but not before one oclock , " replied dartagnan .
" and i also am to fight with this gentleman , " said aramis , coming in his turn onto the place .
" but not until two oclock , " said dartagnan , with the same calmness .
" but what are you going to fight about , athos ? " asked aramis .
he hurt my shoulder . and you , porthos ? " " faith !
i am going to fight -- because i am going to fight , " answered porthos , reddening .
" and you , aramis ? " asked athos .
athos indeed saw a second smile on the lips of dartagnan .
" indeed ? " said athos .
" yes ; a passage of st . augustine , upon which we could not agree , " said the gascon .
" decidedly , this is a clever fellow , " murmured athos .
" and now you are assembled , gentlemen , " said dartagnan , " permit me to offer you my apologies . "
at this word apologies , a cloud passed over the brow of athos , a haughty smile curled the lip of porthos , and a negative sign was the reply of aramis .
and now , gentlemen , i repeat , excuse me , but on that account only , and -- on guard ! "
at these words , with the most gallant air possible , dartagnan drew his sword .
the blood had mounted to the head of dartagnan , and at that moment he would have drawn his sword against all the musketeers in the kingdom as willingly as he now did against athos , porthos , and aramis .
it was a quarter past midday .
the sun was in its zenith , and the spot chosen for the scene of the duel was exposed to its full ardor .
" it is very hot , " said athos , drawing his sword in its turn , " and yet i can not take off my doublet ; for i just now felt my wound begin to bleed again , and i should not like to annoy monsieur with the sight of blood which he has not drawn from me himself . "
" that is true , monsieur , " replied dartagnan , " and whether drawn by myself or another , i assure you i shall always view with regret the blood of so brave a gentleman . i will therefore fight in my doublet , like yourself . "
" come , come , enough of such compliments ! " cried porthos . " remember , we are waiting for our turns . "
" speak for yourself when you are inclined to utter such incongruities , " interrupted aramis .
" when you please , monsieur , " said athos , putting himself on guard .
" i waited your orders , " said dartagnan , crossing swords .
but scarcely had the two rapiers clashed , when a company of the guards of his eminence , commanded by m. de jussac , turned the corner of the convent .
" the cardinal s guards ! " cried aramis and porthos at the same time .
" sheathe your swords , gentlemen , sheathe your swords ! "
but it was too late .
the two combatants had been seen in a position which left no doubt of their intentions .
" halloo ! " cried jussac , advancing toward them and making a sign to his men to do so likewise , " halloo , musketeers ? fighting here , are you ?
and the edicts ? what is become of them ? "
" you are very generous , gentlemen of the guards , " said athos , full of rancor , for jussac was one of the aggressors of the preceding day .
" if we were to see you fighting , i can assure you that we would make no effort to prevent you .
leave us alone , then , and you will enjoy a little amusement without cost to yourselves . "
" gentlemen , " said jussac , " it is with great regret that i pronounce the thing impossible .
duty before everything .
sheathe , then , if you please , and follow us . "
" monsieur , " said aramis , parodying jussac , " it would afford us great pleasure to obey your polite invitation if it depended upon ourselves ; but unfortunately the thing is impossible -- monsieur de treville has forbidden it .
pass on your way , then ; it is the best thing to do . "
this raillery exasperated jussac .
" we will charge upon you , then , " said he , " if you disobey . "
athos , porthos , and aramis instantly drew near one another , while jussac drew up his soldiers .
this short interval was sufficient to determine dartagnan on the part he was to take . it was one of those events which decide the life of a man ; it was a choice between the king and the cardinal -- the choice made , it must be persisted in .
you said you were but three , but it appears to me we are four . "
" but you are not one of us , " said porthos .
" that s true , " replied dartagnan ; " i have not the uniform , but i have the spirit .
my heart is that of a musketeer ; i feel it , monsieur , and that impels me on . "
" withdraw , young man , " cried jussac , who doubtless , by his gestures and the expression of his countenance , had guessed dartagnan s design .
" you may retire ; we consent to that .
save your skin ; begone quickly . "
dartagnan did not budge .
" decidedly , you are a brave fellow , " said athos , pressing the young man s hand .
" come , come , choose your part , " replied jussac .
" well , " said porthos to aramis , " we must do something . "
" monsieur is full of generosity , " said athos .
but all three reflected upon the youth of dartagnan , and dreaded his inexperience .
" we should only be three , one of whom is wounded , with the addition of a boy , " resumed athos ; " and yet it will not be the less said we were four men . "
" yes , but to yield ! " said porthos .
" that is difficult , " replied athos .
dartagnan comprehended their irresolution .
" try me , gentlemen , " said he , " and i swear to you by my honor that i will not go hence if we are conquered . "
" what is your name , my brave fellow ? " said athos .
" dartagnan , monsieur . "
" well , then , athos , porthos , aramis , and dartagnan , forward ! " cried athos .
" come , gentlemen , have you decided ? " cried jussac for the third time .
" it is done , gentlemen , " said athos .
" and what is your choice ? " asked jussac .
" we are about to have the honor of charging you , " replied aramis , lifting his hat with one hand and drawing his sword with the other .
" ah ! you resist , do you ? " cried jussac .
" sblood ; does that astonish you ? "
and the nine combatants rushed upon each other with a fury which however did not exclude a certain degree of method .
athos fixed upon a certain cahusac , a favorite of the cardinal s . porthos had bicarat , and aramis found himself opposed to two adversaries .
as to dartagnan , he sprang toward jussac himself .
the heart of the young gascon beat as if it would burst through his side -- not from fear , god be thanked , he had not the shade of it , but with emulation ; he fought like a furious tiger , turning ten times round his adversary , and changing his ground and his guard twenty times .
jussac was , as was then said , a fine blade , and had had much practice ; nevertheless it required all his skill to defend himself against an adversary who , active and energetic , departed every instant from received rules , attacking him on all sides at once , and yet parrying like a man who had the greatest respect for his own epidermis .
this contest at length exhausted jussac s patience .
furious at being held in check by one whom he had considered a boy , he became warm and began to make mistakes .
dartagnan , who though wanting in practice had a sound theory , redoubled his agility .
jussac , anxious to put an end to this , springing forward , aimed a terrible thrust at his adversary , but the latter parried it ; and while jussac was recovering himself , glided like a serpent beneath his blade , and passed his sword through his body .
jussac fell like a dead mass .
dartagnan then cast an anxious and rapid glance over the field of battle .
aramis had killed one of his adversaries , but the other pressed him warmly .
nevertheless , aramis was in a good situation , and able to defend himself .
bicarat and porthos had just made counterhits . porthos had received a thrust through his arm , and bicarat one through his thigh .
but neither of these two wounds was serious , and they only fought more earnestly .
athos , wounded anew by cahusac , became evidently paler , but did not give way a foot . he only changed his sword hand , and fought with his left hand .
the glance was of sublime eloquence .
athos would have died rather than appeal for help ; but he could look , and with that look ask assistance .
dartagnan interpreted it ; with a terrible bound he sprang to the side of cahusac , crying , " to me , monsieur guardsman ; i will slay you ! "
cahusac turned .
it was time ; for athos , whose great courage alone supported him , sank upon his knee .
" sblood ! " cried he to dartagnan , " do not kill him , young man , i beg of you . i have an old affair to settle with him when i am cured and sound again .
disarm him only -- make sure of his sword .
that s it !
the exclamation was drawn from athos by seeing the sword of cahusac fly twenty paces from him .
dartagnan perceived that it would be disobliging athos not to leave him alone ; and in a few minutes cahusac fell , with a sword thrust through his throat .
at the same instant aramis placed his sword point on the breast of his fallen enemy , and forced him to ask for mercy .
bicarat was one of those iron men who never fell dead .
nevertheless , it was necessary to finish .
the watch might come up and take all the combatants , wounded or not , royalists or cardinalists .
athos , aramis , and dartagnan surrounded bicarat , and required him to surrender .
though alone against all and with a wound in his thigh , bicarat wished to hold out ; but jussac , who had risen upon his elbow , cried out to him to yield .
" but there are four against you ; leave off , i command you . "
" ah , if you command me , that s another thing , " said bicarat .
" as you are my commander , it is my duty to obey . "
and springing backward , he broke his sword across his knee to avoid the necessity of surrendering it , threw the pieces over the convent wall , and crossed him arms , whistling a cardinalist air .
bravery is always respected , even in an enemy .
the musketeers saluted bicarat with their swords , and returned them to their sheaths .
dartagnan did the same . then , assisted by bicarat , the only one left standing , he bore jussac , cahusac , and one of aramis s adversaries who was only wounded , under the porch of the convent .
the fourth , as we have said , was dead .
they then rang the bell , and carrying away four swords out of five , they took their road , intoxicated with joy , toward the hotel of m. de treville .
they walked arm in arm , occupying the whole width of the street and taking in every musketeer they met , so that in the end it became a triumphal march .
the heart of dartagnan swam in delirium ; he marched between athos and porthos , pressing them tenderly .
" if i am not yet a musketeer , " said he to his new friends , as he passed through the gateway of m. de treville s hotel , " at least i have entered upon my apprenticeship , have nt i ? "
6 his majesty king louis xiii
this affair made a great noise . m. de treville scolded his musketeers in public , and congratulated them in private ; but as no time was to be lost in gaining the king , m. de treville hastened to report himself at the louvre . it was already too late .
ah , these musketeers of yours are very devils -- fellows to be hanged . "
but what are they to do ? the guards of monsieur the cardinal are forever seeking quarrels with them , and for the honor of the corps even , the poor young men are obliged to defend themselves . "
" listen to monsieur de treville , " said the king ; " listen to him ! would not one say he was speaking of a religious community ?
in truth , my dear captain , i have a great mind to take away your commission and give it to mademoiselle de chemerault , to whom i promised an abbey .
but do nt fancy that i am going to take you on your bare word .
i am called louis the just , monsieur de treville , and by and by , by and by we will see . "
" ah , sire ; it is because i confide in that justice that i shall wait patiently and quietly the good pleasure of your majesty . "
" wait , then , monsieur , wait , " said the king ; " i will not detain you long . "
in fact , fortune changed ; and as the king began to lose what he had won , he was not sorry to find an excuse for playing charlemagne -- if we may use a gaming phrase of whose origin we confess our ignorance .
the king therefore arose a minute after , and putting the money which lay before him into his pocket , the major part of which arose from his winnings , " la vieuville , " said he , " take my place ; i must speak to monsieur de treville on an affair of importance .
ah , i had eighty louis before me ; put down the same sum , so that they who have lost may have nothing to complain of .
justice before everything . "
then turning toward m. de treville and walking with him toward the embrasure of a window , " well , monsieur , " continued he , " you say it is his eminence s guards who have sought a quarrel with your musketeers ? "
" yes , sire , as they always do . "
" and how did the thing happen ? let us see , for you know , my dear captain , a judge must hear both sides . "
" good lord ! in the most simple and natural manner possible .
three of my best soldiers , whom your majesty knows by name , and whose devotedness you have more than once appreciated , and who have , i dare affirm to the king , his service much at heart -- three of my best soldiers , i say , athos , porthos , and aramis , had made a party of pleasure with a young fellow from gascony , whom i had introduced to them the same morning .
the party was to take place at st . germain , i believe , and they had appointed to meet at the carmes - deschaux , when they were disturbed by de jussac , cahusac , bicarat , and two other guardsmen , who certainly did not go there in such a numerous company without some ill intention against the edicts . " " ah , ah !
you incline me to think so , " said the king . " there is no doubt they went thither to fight themselves . "
" i do not accuse them , sire ; but i leave your majesty to judge what five armed men could possibly be going to do in such a deserted place as the neighborhood of the convent des carmes . "
" yes , you are right , treville , you are right ! "
" then , upon seeing my musketeers they changed their minds , and forgot their private hatred for partisan hatred ; for your majesty can not be ignorant that the musketeers , who belong to the king and nobody but the king , are the natural enemies of the guardsmen , who belong to the cardinal . "
you say , then , that the guardsmen sought a quarrel with the musketeers ? "
" i say that it is probable that things have fallen out so , but i will not swear to it , sire .
you know how difficult it is to discover the truth ; and unless a man be endowed with that admirable instinct which causes louis xiii to be named the just-- "
" you are right , treville ; but they were not alone , your musketeers . they had a youth with them ? "
" yes , sire , and one wounded man ; so that three of the king s musketeers -- one of whom was wounded -- and a youth not only maintained their ground against five of the most terrible of the cardinal s guardsmen , but absolutely brought four of them to earth . "
" why , this is a victory ! " cried the king , all radiant , " a complete victory ! "
" yes , sire ; as complete as that of the bridge of ce . "
" four men , one of them wounded , and a youth , say you ? "
" one hardly a young man ; but who , however , behaved himself so admirably on this occasion that i will take the liberty of recommending him to your majesty . "
" how does he call himself ? "
" dartagnan , sire ; he is the son of one of my oldest friends -- the son of a man who served under the king your father , of glorious memory , in the civil war . "
" and you say this young man behaved himself well ?
tell me how , treville -- you know how i delight in accounts of war and fighting . "
and louis xiii twisted his mustache proudly , placing his hand upon his hip .
" sire , " resumed treville , " as i told you , monsieur dartagnan is little more than a boy ; and as he has not the honor of being a musketeer , he was dressed as a citizen . the guards of the cardinal , perceiving his youth and that he did not belong to the corps , invited him to retire before they attacked . "
" so you may plainly see , treville , " interrupted the king , " it was they who attacked ? "
" brave young man ! " murmured the king .
" well , he did remain with them ; and your majesty has in him so firm a champion that it was he who gave jussac the terrible sword thrust which has made the cardinal so angry . "
" he who wounded jussac ! " cried the king , " he , a boy !
treville , that s impossible ! "
" it is as i have the honor to relate it to your majesty . "
" jussac , one of the first swordsmen in the kingdom ? "
" well , sire , for once he found his master . "
" i will see this young man , treville -- i will see him ; and if anything can be done -- well , we will make it our business . "
" when will your majesty deign to receive him ? "
" tomorrow , at midday , treville . "
" shall i bring him alone ? "
" no , bring me all four together .
i wish to thank them all at once .
devoted men are so rare , treville , by the back staircase .
it is useless to let the cardinal know . "
" yes , sire . "
" you understand , treville -- an edict is still an edict , it is forbidden to fight , after all . "
" but this encounter , sire , is quite out of the ordinary conditions of a duel . it is a brawl ; and the proof is that there were five of the cardinal s guardsmen against my three musketeers and monsieur dartagnan . "
" that is true , " said the king ; " but never mind , treville , come still by the back staircase . "
treville smiled ; but as it was indeed something to have prevailed upon this child to rebel against his master , he saluted the king respectfully , and with this agreement , took leave of him .
that evening the three musketeers were informed of the honor accorded them .
as they had long been acquainted with the king , they were not much excited ; but dartagnan , with his gascon imagination , saw in it his future fortune , and passed the night in golden dreams .
by eight oclock in the morning he was at the apartment of athos .
dartagnan found the musketeer dressed and ready to go out .
as the hour to wait upon the king was not till twelve , he had made a party with porthos and aramis to play a game at tennis in a tennis court situated near the stables of the luxembourg .
athos invited dartagnan to follow them ; and although ignorant of the game , which he had never played , he accepted , not knowing what to do with his time from nine oclock in the morning , as it then scarcely was , till twelve .
the two musketeers were already there , and were playing together .
athos , who was very expert in all bodily exercises , passed with dartagnan to the opposite side and challenged them ; but at the first effort he made , although he played with his left hand , he found that his wound was yet too recent to allow of such exertion .
dartagnan remained , therefore , alone ; and as he declared he was too ignorant of the game to play it regularly they only continued giving balls to one another without counting .
but one of these balls , launched by porthos  herculean hand , passed so close to dartagnan s face that he thought that if , instead of passing near , it had hit him , his audience would have been probably lost , as it would have been impossible for him to present himself before the king .
now , as upon this audience , in his gascon imagination , depended his future life , he saluted aramis and porthos politely , declaring that he would not resume the game until he should be prepared to play with them on more equal terms , and went and took his place near the cord and in the gallery .
unfortunately for dartagnan , among the spectators was one of his eminence s guardsmen , who , still irritated by the defeat of his companions , which had happened only the day before , had promised himself to seize the first opportunity of avenging it .
he believed this opportunity was now come and addressed his neighbor : " it is not astonishing that that young man should be afraid of a ball , for he is doubtless a musketeer apprentice . "
dartagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him , and fixed his eyes intensely upon the guardsman who had just made this insolent speech .
" pardieu , " resumed the latter , twisting his mustache , " look at me as long as you like , my little gentleman ! i have said what i have said . "
" and as since that which you have said is too clear to require any explanation , " replied dartagnan , in a low voice , " i beg you to follow me . "
" and when ? " asked the guardsman , with the same jeering air .
" at once , if you please . "
" and you know who i am , without doubt ? "
" i ? i am completely ignorant ; nor does it much disquiet me . "
" you re in the wrong there ; for if you knew my name , perhaps you would not be so pressing . "
" what is your name ? "
" bernajoux , at your service . "
" well , then , monsieur bernajoux , " said dartagnan , tranquilly , " i will wait for you at the door . "
" go , monsieur , i will follow you . "
" do not hurry yourself , monsieur , lest it be observed that we go out together . you must be aware that for our undertaking , company would be in the way . "
" that s true , " said the guardsman , astonished that his name had not produced more effect upon the young man .
porthos and aramis were so engaged with their game , and athos was watching them with so much attention , that they did not even perceive their young companion go out , who , as he had told the guardsman of his eminence , stopped outside the door . an instant after , the guardsman descended in his turn .
as dartagnan had no time to lose , on account of the audience of the king , which was fixed for midday , he cast his eyes around , and seeing that the street was empty , said to his adversary , " my faith !
it is fortunate for you , although your name is bernajoux , to have only to deal with an apprentice musketeer . never mind ; be content , i will do my best .
on guard ! "
" but , " said he whom dartagnan thus provoked , " it appears to me that this place is badly chosen , and that we should be better behind the abbey st . germain or in the pre - aux - clercs . "
" what you say is full of sense , " replied dartagnan ; " but unfortunately i have very little time to spare , having an appointment at twelve precisely .
on guard , then , monsieur , on guard ! "
bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment paid to him twice .
in an instant his sword glittered in his hand , and he sprang upon his adversary , whom , thanks to his great youthfulness , he hoped to intimidate .
as , however , he did not fall , as he did not declare himself conquered , but only broke away toward the hotel of m. de la tremouille , in whose service he had a relative , dartagnan was ignorant of the seriousness of the last wound his adversary had received , and pressing him warmly , without doubt would soon have completed his work with a third blow , when the noise which arose from the street being heard in the tennis court , two of the friends of the guardsman , who had seen him go out after exchanging some words with dartagnan , rushed , sword in hand , from the court , and fell upon the conqueror .
but athos , porthos , and aramis quickly appeared in their turn , and the moment the two guardsmen attacked their young companion , drove them back .
bernajoux now fell , and as the guardsmen were only two against four , they began to cry , " to the rescue ! the hotel de la tremouille ! "
at these cries , all who were in the hotel rushed out and fell upon the four companions , who on their side cried aloud , " to the rescue , musketeers ! "
this cry was generally heeded ; for the musketeers were known to be enemies of the cardinal , and were beloved on account of the hatred they bore to his eminence .
thus the soldiers of other companies than those which belonged to the red duke , as aramis had called him , often took part with the king s musketeers in these quarrels .
of three guardsmen of the company of m. dessessart who were passing , two came to the assistance of the four companions , while the other ran toward the hotel of m. de treville , crying , " to the rescue , musketeers ! to the rescue ! "
as to the wounded man , he had been taken in at once , and , as we have said , in a very bad state .
excitement was at its height among the musketeers and their allies , and they even began to deliberate whether they should not set fire to the hotel to punish the insolence of m. de la tremouille s domestics in daring to make a sortie upon the king s musketeers .
m de treville , accompanied by the four young fellows , directed his course toward the louvre ; but to the great astonishment of the captain of the musketeers , he was informed that the king had gone stag hunting in the forest of st . germain .
m. de treville required this intelligence to be repeated to him twice , and each time his companions saw his brow become darker .
" had his majesty , " asked he , " any intention of holding this hunting party yesterday ? "
" no , your excellency , " replied the valet de chambre , " the master of the hounds came this morning to inform him that he had marked down a stag .
at first the king answered that he would not go ; but he could not resist his love of sport , and set out after dinner . "
" and the king has seen the cardinal ? " asked m. de treville .
" in all probability he has , " replied the valet , " for i saw the horses harnessed to his eminence s carriage this morning , and when i asked where he was going , they told me ,  to st . germain .  "
this advice was too reasonable , and moreover came from a man who knew the king too well , to allow the four young men to dispute it .
m. de treville recommended everyone to return home and wait for news .
on entering his hotel , m. de treville thought it best to be first in making the complaint .
he sent one of his servants to m. de la tremouille with a letter in which he begged of him to eject the cardinal s guardsmen from his house , and to reprimand his people for their audacity in making sortie against the king s musketeers .
but m. de la tremouille -- already prejudiced by his esquire , whose relative , as we already know , bernajoux was -- replied that it was neither for m. de treville nor the musketeers to complain , but , on the contrary , for him , whose people the musketeers had assaulted and whose hotel they had endeavored to burn .
now , as the debate between these two nobles might last a long time , each becoming , naturally , more firm in his own opinion , m. de treville thought of an expedient which might terminate it quietly . this was to go himself to m. de la tremouille .
he repaired , therefore , immediately to his hotel , and caused himself to be announced .
the two nobles saluted each other politely , for if no friendship existed between them , there was at least esteem .
both were men of courage and honor ; and as m. de la tremouille -- a protestant , and seeing the king seldom -- was of no party , he did not , in general , carry any bias into his social relations .
this time , however , his address , although polite , was cooler than usual .
" monsieur , " said m. de treville , " we fancy that we have each cause to complain of the other , and i am come to endeavor to clear up this affair . "
" i have no objection , " replied m. de la tremouille , " but i warn you that i am well informed , and all the fault is with your musketeers . "
" you are too just and reasonable a man , monsieur ! " said treville , " not to accept the proposal i am about to make to you . "
" make it , monsieur , i listen . "
" how is monsieur bernajoux , your esquire s relative ? "
" why , monsieur , very ill indeed !
" but has the wounded man retained his senses ? "
" perfectly . "
" does he talk ? "
" with difficulty , but he can speak . "
" well , monsieur , let us go to him . let us adjure him , in the name of the god before whom he must perhaps appear , to speak the truth .
i will take him for judge in his own cause , monsieur , and will believe what he will say . "
m de la tremouille reflected for an instant ; then as it was difficult to suggest a more reasonable proposal , he agreed to it .
both descended to the chamber in which the wounded man lay .
the latter , on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him , endeavored to raise himself up in his bed ; but he was too weak , and exhausted by the effort , he fell back again almost senseless .
m de la tremouille approached him , and made him inhale some salts , which recalled him to life .
then m. de treville , unwilling that it should be thought that he had influenced the wounded man , requested m. de la tremouille to interrogate him himself .
that happened which m. de treville had foreseen .
he wished bernajoux a speedy convalescence , took leave of m. de la tremouille , returned to his hotel , and immediately sent word to the four friends that he awaited their company at dinner .
m de treville entertained good company , wholly anticardinalist , though .
it may easily be understood , therefore , that the conversation during the whole of dinner turned upon the two checks that his eminence s guardsmen had received .
now , as dartagnan had been the hero of these two fights , it was upon him that all the felicitations fell , which athos , porthos , and aramis abandoned to him , not only as good comrades , but as men who had so often had their turn that could very well afford him his .
toward six oclock m. de treville announced that it was time to go to the louvre ; but as the hour of audience granted by his majesty was past , instead of claiming the entree by the back stairs , he placed himself with the four young men in the antechamber .
the king had not yet returned from hunting .
our young men had been waiting about half an hour , amid a crowd of courtiers , when all the doors were thrown open , and his majesty was announced .
at his announcement dartagnan felt himself tremble to the very marrow of his bones .
the coming instant would in all probability decide the rest of his life .
his eyes therefore were fixed in a sort of agony upon the door through which the king must enter .
louis xiii appeared , walking fast . he was in hunting costume covered with dust , wearing large boots , and holding a whip in his hand .
at the first glance , dartagnan judged that the mind of the king was stormy .
this disposition , visible as it was in his majesty , did not prevent the courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway . in royal antechambers it is worth more to be viewed with an angry eye than not to be seen at all .
the three musketeers therefore did not hesitate to make a step forward . dartagnan on the contrary remained concealed behind them ; but although the king knew athos , porthos , and aramis personally , he passed before them without speaking or looking -- indeed , as if he had never seen them before .
as for m. de treville , when the eyes of the king fell upon him , he sustained the look with so much firmness that it was the king who dropped his eyes ; after which his majesty , grumbling , entered his apartment .
" matters go but badly , " said athos , smiling ; " and we shall not be made chevaliers of the order this time . "
" wait here ten minutes , " said m. de treville ; " and if at the expiration of ten minutes you do not see me come out , return to my hotel , for it will be useless for you to wait for me longer . "
the four young men waited ten minutes , a quarter of an hour , twenty minutes ; and seeing that m. de treville did not return , went away very uneasy as to what was going to happen .
m de treville entered the king s cabinet boldly , and found his majesty in a very ill humor , seated on an armchair , beating his boot with the handle of his whip . this , however , did not prevent his asking , with the greatest coolness , after his majesty s health .
" bad , monsieur , bad ! " replied the king ; " i am bored . "
this was , in fact , the worst complaint of louis xiii , who would sometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say , " monsieur so - and - so , let us weary ourselves together . "
" how !
your majesty is bored ?
have you not enjoyed the pleasures of the chase today ? "
" a fine pleasure , indeed , monsieur !
upon my soul , everything degenerates ; and i do nt know whether it is the game which leaves no scent , or the dogs that have no noses .
we started a stag of ten branches . we chased him for six hours , and when he was near being taken -- when st.-simon was already putting his horn to his mouth to sound the mort -- crack , all the pack takes the wrong scent and sets off after a two - year - older .
falconers are declining . i know no one but myself who is acquainted with the noble art of venery .
ah ! a propos of the cardinal , monsieur de treville , i am vexed with you ! "
this was the chance at which m. de treville waited for the king .
" and in what have i been so unfortunate as to displease your majesty ? " asked m. de treville , feigning the most profound astonishment .
" is it thus you perform your charge , monsieur ? " continued the king , without directly replying to de treville s question . " is it for this i name you captain of my musketeers , that they should assassinate a man , disturb a whole quarter , and endeavor to set fire to paris , without your saying a word ?
but yet , " continued the king , " undoubtedly my haste accuses you wrongfully ; without doubt the rioters are in prison , and you come to tell me justice is done . "
" sire , " replied m. de treville , calmly , " on the contrary , i come to demand it of you . "
" and against whom ? " cried the king .
" against calumniators , " said m. de treville . " ah !
this is something new , " replied the king .
" will you tell me that your three damned musketeers , athos , porthos , and aramis , and your youngster from bearn , have not fallen , like so many furies , upon poor bernajoux , and have not maltreated him in such a fashion that probably by this time he is dead ?
tell me , now , can you deny all this ? "
" and who told you this fine story , sire ? " asked treville , quietly .
" who has told me this fine story , monsieur ? who should it be but he who watches while i sleep , who labors while i amuse myself , who conducts everything at home and abroad -- in france as in europe ? "
" your majesty probably refers to god , " said m. de treville ; " for i know no one except god who can be so far above your majesty . "
" no , monsieur ; i speak of the prop of the state , of my only servant , of my only friend -- of the cardinal . "
" his eminence is not his holiness , sire . "
" what do you mean by that , monsieur ? "
" that it is only the pope who is infallible , and that this infallibility does not extend to cardinals . "
" you mean to say that he deceives me ; you mean to say that he betrays me ?
you accuse him , then ?
come , speak ; avow freely that you accuse him ! "
" no , sire , but i say that he deceives himself . i say that he is ill - informed . i say that he has hastily accused your majesty s musketeers , toward whom he is unjust , and that he has not obtained his information from good sources . "
" the accusation comes from monsieur de la tremouille , from the duke himself .
what do you say to that ? "
" what ? "
" it is that your majesty will make him come here , will interrogate him yourself , tete - a - tete , without witnesses , and that i shall see your majesty as soon as you have seen the duke . " " what , then !
you will bind yourself , " cried the king , " by what monsieur de la tremouille shall say ? "
" yes , sire . "
" you will accept his judgment ? "
" undoubtedly . "
" any you will submit to the reparation he may require ? "
" certainly . "
" la chesnaye , " said the king .
" la chesnaye ! "
louis xiii s confidential valet , who never left the door , entered in reply to the call .
" la chesnaye , " said the king , " let someone go instantly and find monsieur de la tremouille ; i wish to speak with him this evening . "
" your majesty gives me your word that you will not see anyone between monsieur de la tremouille and myself ? "
" nobody , by the faith of a gentleman . "
" tomorrow , then , sire ? "
" tomorrow , monsieur . "
" at what oclock , please your majesty ? "
" at any hour you will . "
" but in coming too early i should be afraid of awakening your majesty . "
" awaken me !
do you think i ever sleep , then ?
i sleep no longer , monsieur . i sometimes dream , that s all .
come , then , as early as you like -- at seven oclock ; but beware , if you and your musketeers are guilty . "
" if my musketeers are guilty , sire , the guilty shall be placed in your majesty s hands , who will dispose of them at your good pleasure .
does your majesty require anything further ? speak , i am ready to obey . "
" no , monsieur , no ; i am not called louis the just without reason .
tomorrow , then , monsieur -- tomorrow . "
" till then , god preserve your majesty ! "
he took them with him , without encouraging them or promising them anything , and without concealing from them that their luck , and even his own , depended upon the cast of the dice .
arrived at the foot of the back stairs , he desired them to wait .
if the king was still irritated against them , they would depart without being seen ; if the king consented to see them , they would only have to be called .
this circumstance pleased m. de treville much , as he thus became certain that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself between m. de la tremouille s testimony and himself .
in fact , ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door of the king s closet opened , and m. de treville saw m. de la tremouille come out .
i have told him the truth ; that is to say , that the fault lay with my people , and that i was ready to offer you my excuses .
" monsieur the duke , " said m. de treville , " i was so confident of your loyalty that i required no other defender before his majesty than yourself .
i find that i have not been mistaken , and i thank you that there is still one man in france of whom may be said , without disappointment , what i have said of you . "
" that s well said , " cried the king , who had heard all these compliments through the open door ; " only tell him , treville , since he wishes to be considered your friend , that i also wish to be one of his , but he neglects me ; that it is nearly three years since i have seen him , and that i never do see him unless i send for him .
tell him all this for me , for these are things which a king can not say for himself . "
" thanks , sire , thanks , " said the duke ; " but your majesty may be assured that it is not those -- i do not speak of monsieur de treville -- whom your majesty sees at all hours of the day that are most devoted to you . " " ah !
you have heard what i said ? so much the better , duke , so much the better , " said the king , advancing toward the door .
" ah ! it is you , treville . where are your musketeers ?
i told you the day before yesterday to bring them with you ; why have you not done so ? "
" they are below , sire , and with your permission la chesnaye will bid them come up . "
" yes , yes , let them come up immediately . it is nearly eight oclock , and at nine i expect a visit .
go , monsieur duke , and return often .
come in , treville . "
the duke saluted and retired .
at the moment he opened the door , the three musketeers and dartagnan , conducted by la chesnaye , appeared at the top of the staircase .
" come in , my braves , " said the king , " come in ; i am going to scold you . "
the musketeers advanced , bowing , dartagnan following closely behind them .
" what the devil ! " continued the king . " seven of his eminence s guards placed hors de combat by you four in two days !
that s too many , gentlemen , too many !
if you go on so , his eminence will be forced to renew his company in three weeks , and i to put the edicts in force in all their rigor .
one now and then i do nt say much about ; but seven in two days , i repeat , it is too many , it is far too many ! "
" therefore , sire , your majesty sees that they are come , quite contrite and repentant , to offer you their excuses . "
" quite contrite and repentant !
hem ! " said the king . " i place no confidence in their hypocritical faces . in particular , there is one yonder of a gascon look .
come hither , monsieur . "
dartagnan , who understood that it was to him this compliment was addressed , approached , assuming a most deprecating air .
" why you told me he was a young man ? this is a boy , treville , a mere boy !
do you mean to say that it was he who bestowed that severe thrust at jussac ? "
" and those two equally fine thrusts at bernajoux . "
" truly ! "
" without reckoning , " said athos , " that if he had not rescued me from the hands of cahusac , i should not now have the honor of making my very humble reverence to your majesty . "
" why he is a very devil , this bearnais ! ventre - saint - gris , monsieur de treville , as the king my father would have said .
but at this sort of work , many doublets must be slashed and many swords broken .
now , gascons are always poor , are they not ? "
" sire , i can assert that they have hitherto discovered no gold mines in their mountains ; though the lord owes them this miracle in recompense for the manner in which they supported the pretensions of the king your father . "
" which is to say that the gascons made a king of me , myself , seeing that i am my father s son , is it not , treville ?
well , happily , i do nt say nay to it .
la chesnaye , go and see if by rummaging all my pockets you can find forty pistoles ; and if you can find them , bring them to me .
" this is all very well , " murmured the king , " yes , this is just the account the duke gave me of the affair . poor cardinal !
seven men in two days , and those of his very best ! but that s quite enough , gentlemen ; please to understand , that s enough . you have taken your revenge for the rue ferou , and even exceeded it ; you ought to be satisfied . "
" if your majesty is so , " said treville , " we are . "
" oh , yes ; i am , " added the king , taking a handful of gold from la chesnaye , and putting it into the hand of dartagnan .
" here , " said he , " is a proof of my satisfaction . "
at this epoch , the ideas of pride which are in fashion in our days did not prevail .
a gentleman received , from hand to hand , money from the king , and was not the least in the world humiliated .
dartagnan put his forty pistoles into his pocket without any scruple -- on the contrary , thanking his majesty greatly .
" there , " said the king , looking at a clock , " there , now , as it is half past eight , you may retire ; for as i told you , i expect someone at nine .
thanks for your devotedness , gentlemen .
i may continue to rely upon it , may i not ? "
" oh , sire ! " cried the four companions , with one voice , " we would allow ourselves to be cut to pieces in your majesty s service . "
" well , well , but keep whole ; that will be better , and you will be more useful to me .
treville , " added the king , in a low voice , as the others were retiring , " as you have no room in the musketeers , and as we have besides decided that a novitiate is necessary before entering that corps , place this young man in the company of the guards of monsieur dessessart , your brother - in - law .
ah , pardieu , treville !
i enjoy beforehand the face the cardinal will make . he will be furious ; but i do nt care .
i am doing what is right . " the king waved his hand to treville , who left him and rejoined the musketeers , whom he found sharing the forty pistoles with dartagnan .
the cardinal , as his majesty had said , was really furious , so furious that during eight days he absented himself from the king s gaming table . this did not prevent the king from being as complacent to him as possible whenever he met him , or from asking in the kindest tone , " well , monsieur cardinal , how fares it with that poor jussac and that poor bernajoux of yours ? "
7 the interior of " the musketeers "
when dartagnan was out of the louvre , and consulted his friends upon the use he had best make of his share of the forty pistoles , athos advised him to order a good repast at the pomme - de - pin , porthos to engage a lackey , and aramis to provide himself with a suitable mistress .
the repast was carried into effect that very day , and the lackey waited at table .
the repast had been ordered by athos , and the lackey furnished by porthos .
porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflective and contemplative organization , and he had brought him away without any other recommendation .
the noble carriage of this gentleman , for whom he believed himself to be engaged , had won planchet -- that was the name of the picard . he felt a slight disappointment , however , when he saw that this place was already taken by a compeer named mousqueton , and when porthos signified to him that the state of his household , though great , would not support two servants , and that he must enter into the service of dartagnan .
the bed was the only one in the apartment , which consisted of an antechamber and a bedroom .
planchet slept in the antechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of dartagnan , and which dartagnan from that time made shift to do without .
athos , on his part , had a valet whom he had trained in his service in a thoroughly peculiar fashion , and who was named grimaud .
he was very taciturn , this worthy signor .
be it understood we are speaking of athos .
during the five or six years that he had lived in the strictest intimacy with his companions , porthos and aramis , they could remember having often seen him smile , but had never heard him laugh .
his words were brief and expressive , conveying all that was meant , and no more ; no embellishments , no embroidery , no arabesques .
his conversation a matter of fact , without a single romance .
he never spoke of women .
he certainly did not prevent others from speaking of them before him , although it was easy to perceive that this kind of conversation , in which he only mingled by bitter words and misanthropic remarks , was very disagreeable to him .
his reserve , his roughness , and his silence made almost an old man of him . he had , then , in order not to disturb his habits , accustomed grimaud to obey him upon a simple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips .
he never spoke to him , except under the most extraordinary occasions .
sometimes , grimaud , who feared his master as he did fire , while entertaining a strong attachment to his person and a great veneration for his talents , believed he perfectly understood what he wanted , flew to execute the order received , and did precisely the contrary .
athos then shrugged his shoulders , and , without putting himself in a passion , thrashed grimaud .
on these days he spoke a little .
porthos , as we have seen , had a character exactly opposite to that of athos . he not only talked much , but he talked loudly , little caring , we must render him that justice , whether anybody listened to him or not . he talked for the pleasure of talking and for the pleasure of hearing himself talk . he spoke upon all subjects except the sciences , alleging in this respect the inveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his childhood .
but with his simple musketeer s uniform and nothing but the manner in which he threw back his head and advanced his foot , athos instantly took the place which was his due and consigned the ostentatious porthos to the second rank .
an old proverb says , " like master , like man . "
let us pass , then , from the valet of athos to the valet of porthos , from grimaud to mousqueton .
mousqueton was a norman , whose pacific name of boniface his master had changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of mousqueton .
he had entered the service of porthos upon condition that he should only be clothed and lodged , though in a handsome manner ; but he claimed two hours a day to himself , consecrated to an employment which would provide for his other wants .
porthos agreed to the bargain ; the thing suited him wonderfully well .
he had doublets cut out of his old clothes and cast - off cloaks for mousqueton , and thanks to a very intelligent tailor , who made his clothes look as good as new by turning them , and whose wife was suspected of wishing to make porthos descend from his aristocratic habits , mousqueton made a very good figure when attending on his master .
thanks to the hopes which his master entertained of someday entering into orders , he was always clothed in black , as became the servant of a churchman .
he was a berrichon , thirty - five or forty years old , mild , peaceable , sleek , employing the leisure his master left him in the perusal of pious works , providing rigorously for two a dinner of few dishes , but excellent .
for the rest , he was dumb , blind , and deaf , and of unimpeachable fidelity .
athos dwelt in the rue ferou , within two steps of the luxembourg . his apartment consisted of two small chambers , very nicely fitted up , in a furnished house , the hostess of which , still young and still really handsome , cast tender glances uselessly at him .
some fragments of past splendor appeared here and there upon the walls of this modest lodging ; a sword , for example , richly embossed , which belonged by its make to the times of francis i , the hilt of which alone , encrusted with precious stones , might be worth two hundred pistoles , and which , nevertheless , in his moments of greatest distress athos had never pledged or offered for sale .
it had long been an object of ambition for porthos .
porthos would have given ten years of his life to possess this sword .
one day , when he had an appointment with a duchess , he endeavored even to borrow it of athos .
athos , without saying anything , emptied his pockets , got together all his jewels , purses , aiguillettes , and gold chains , and offered them all to porthos ; but as to the sword , he said it was sealed to its place and should never quit it until its master should himself quit his lodgings .
in addition to the sword , there was a portrait representing a nobleman of the time of henry iii , dressed with the greatest elegance , and who wore the order of the holy ghost ; and this portrait had certain resemblances of lines with athos , certain family likenesses which indicated that this great noble , a knight of the order of the king , was his ancestor .
besides these , a casket of magnificent goldwork , with the same arms as the sword and the portrait , formed a middle ornament to the mantelpiece , and assorted badly with the rest of the furniture .
athos always carried the key of this coffer about him ; but he one day opened it before porthos , and porthos was convinced that this coffer contained nothing but letters and papers -- love letters and family papers , no doubt .
porthos lived in an apartment , large in size and of very sumptuous appearance , in the rue du vieux - colombier .
every time he passed with a friend before his windows , at one of which mousqueton was sure to be placed in full livery , porthos raised his head and his hand , and said , " that is my abode ! "
as to aramis , he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir , an eating room , and a bedroom , which room , situated , as the others were , on the ground floor , looked out upon a little fresh green garden , shady and impenetrable to the eyes of his neighbors .
with regard to dartagnan , we know how he was lodged , and we have already made acquaintance with his lackey , master planchet .
he addressed himself then to porthos to gain information respecting athos and aramis , and to aramis in order to learn something of porthos .
unfortunately porthos knew nothing of the life of his silent companion but what revealed itself .
it was said athos had met with great crosses in love , and that a frightful treachery had forever poisoned the life of this gallant man .
what could this treachery be ?
all the world was ignorant of it .
as to porthos , except his real name ( as was the case with those of his two comrades ) , his life was very easily known .
vain and indiscreet , it was as easy to see through him as through a crystal .
the only thing to mislead the investigator would have been belief in all the good things he said of himself .
" and you , my dear companion , " said he , " you speak of the baronesses , countesses , and princesses of others ? "
" pardieu ! i spoke of them because porthos talked of them himself , because he had paraded all these fine things before me .
but be assured , my dear monsieur dartagnan , that if i had obtained them from any other source , or if they had been confided to me , there exists no confessor more discreet than myself . "
" oh , i do nt doubt that , " replied dartagnan ; " but it seems to me that you are tolerably familiar with coats of arms -- a certain embroidered handkerchief , for instance , to which i owe the honor of your acquaintance ? "
this time aramis was not angry , but assumed the most modest air and replied in a friendly tone , " my dear friend , do not forget that i wish to belong to the church , and that i avoid all mundane opportunities .
the handkerchief you saw had not been given to me , but it had been forgotten and left at my house by one of my friends .
i was obliged to pick it up in order not to compromise him and the lady he loves .
as for myself , i neither have , nor desire to have , a mistress , following in that respect the very judicious example of athos , who has none any more than i have . "
" but what the devil ! you are not a priest , you are a musketeer ! "
" a musketeer for a time , my friend , as the cardinal says , a musketeer against my will , but a churchman at heart , believe me .
" not at all ; it interests me very much , " cried dartagnan ; " and at this moment i have absolutely nothing to do . "
" yes , but i have my breviary to repeat , " answered aramis ; " then some verses to compose , which madame daiguillon begged of me . then i must go to the rue st . honore in order to purchase some rouge for madame de chevreuse .
aramis held out his hand in a cordial manner to his young companion , and took leave of him .
notwithstanding all the pains he took , dartagnan was unable to learn any more concerning his three new - made friends .
he formed , therefore , the resolution of believing for the present all that was said of their past , hoping for more certain and extended revelations in the future .
in the meanwhile , he looked upon athos as an achilles , porthos as an ajax , and aramis as a joseph .
as to the rest , the life of the four young friends was joyous enough . athos played , and that as a rule unfortunately .
nevertheless , he never borrowed a sou of his companions , although his purse was ever at their service ; and when he had played upon honor , he always awakened his creditor by six oclock the next morning to pay the debt of the preceding evening .
porthos had his fits . on the days when he won he was insolent and ostentatious ; if he lost , he disappeared completely for several days , after which he reappeared with a pale face and thinner person , but with money in his purse .
as to aramis , he never played .
he was the worst musketeer and the most unconvivial companion imaginable .
he had always something or other to do .
sometimes in the midst of dinner , when everyone , under the attraction of wine and in the warmth of conversation , believed they had two or three hours longer to enjoy themselves at table , aramis looked at his watch , arose with a bland smile , and took leave of the company , to go , as he said , to consult a casuist with whom he had an appointment .
at other times he would return home to write a treatise , and requested his friends not to disturb him .
at this athos would smile , with his charming , melancholy smile , which so became his noble countenance , and porthos would drink , swearing that aramis would never be anything but a village cure .
planchet , dartagnan s valet , supported his good fortune nobly . he received thirty sous per day , and for a month he returned to his lodgings gay as a chaffinch , and affable toward his master .
when the wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping of the rue des fossoyeurs -- that is to say , when the forty pistoles of king louis xiii were consumed or nearly so -- he commenced complaints which athos thought nauseous , porthos indecent , and aramis ridiculous .
athos counseled dartagnan to dismiss the fellow ; porthos was of opinion that he should give him a good thrashing first ; and aramis contended that a master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him .
" this is serious , " answered the three friends ; " it is a family affair . it is with valets as with wives , they must be placed at once upon the footing in which you wish them to remain .
reflect upon it . "
dartagnan did reflect , and resolved to thrash planchet provisionally ; which he did with the conscientiousness that dartagnan carried into everything . after having well beaten him , he forbade him to leave his service without his permission .
" for , " added he , " the future can not fail to mend ; i inevitably look for better times .
your fortune is therefore made if you remain with me , and i am too good a master to allow you to miss such a chance by granting you the dismissal you require . "
the life of the four young men had become fraternal . dartagnan , who had no settled habits of his own , as he came from his province into the midst of his world quite new to him , fell easily into the habits of his friends .
they rose about eight oclock in the winter , about six in summer , and went to take the countersign and see how things went on at m. de treville s .
dartagnan , although he was not a musketeer , performed the duty of one with remarkable punctuality . he went on guard because he always kept company with whoever of his friends was on duty .
he was well known at the hotel of the musketeers , where everyone considered him a good comrade . m. de treville , who had appreciated him at the first glance and who bore him a real affection , never ceased recommending him to the king .
on their side , the three musketeers were much attached to their young comrade .
the friendship which united these four men , and the need they felt of seeing another three or four times a day , whether for dueling , business , or pleasure , caused them to be continually running after one another like shadows ; and the inseparables were constantly to be met with seeking one another , from the luxembourg to the place st . sulpice , or from the rue du vieux - colombier to the luxembourg .
in the meanwhile the promises of m. de treville went on prosperously .
one fine morning the king commanded m. de chevalier dessessart to admit dartagnan as a cadet in his company of guards .
dartagnan , with a sigh , donned his uniform , which he would have exchanged for that of a musketeer at the expense of ten years of his existence .
but m. de treville promised this favor after a novitiate of two years -- a novitiate which might besides be abridged if an opportunity should present itself for dartagnan to render the king any signal service , or to distinguish himself by some brilliant action .
upon this promise dartagnan withdrew , and the next day he began service .
then it became the turn of athos , porthos , and aramis to mount guard with dartagnan when he was on duty . the company of m. le chevalier dessessart thus received four instead of one when it admitted dartagnan .
8 concerning a court intrigue
in the meantime , the forty pistoles of king louis xiii , like all other things of this world , after having had a beginning had an end , and after this end our four companions began to be somewhat embarrassed .
at first , athos supported the association for a time with his own means .
porthos succeeded him ; and thanks to one of those disappearances to which he was accustomed , he was able to provide for the wants of all for a fortnight . at last it became aramis s turn , who performed it with a good grace and who succeeded -- as he said , by selling some theological books -- in procuring a few pistoles .
then the inconvenience became distress . the hungry friends , followed by their lackeys , were seen haunting the quays and guard rooms , picking up among their friends abroad all the dinners they could meet with ; for according to the advice of aramis , it was prudent to sow repasts right and left in prosperity , in order to reap a few in time of need .
athos was invited four times , and each time took his friends and their lackeys with him .
he was a man , as must have been already perceived , who made but little noise , and yet was much sought after .
as to dartagnan , who as yet knew nobody in the capital , he only found one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his own province , and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the guards .
dartagnan thus felt himself humiliated in having only procured one meal and a half for his companions -- as the breakfast at the priest s could only be counted as half a repast -- in return for the feasts which athos , porthos , and aramis had procured him .
he fancied himself a burden to the society , forgetting in his perfectly juvenile good faith that he had fed this society for a month ; and he set his mind actively to work .
he reflected that this coalition of four young , brave , enterprising , and active men ought to have some other object than swaggering walks , fencing lessons , and practical jokes , more or less witty .
in fact , four men such as they were -- four men devoted to one another , from their purses to their lives ; four men always supporting one another , never yielding , executing singly or together the resolutions formed in common ; four arms threatening the four cardinal points , or turning toward a single point -- must inevitably , either subterraneously , in open day , by mining , in the trench , by cunning , or by force , open themselves a way toward the object they wished to attain , however well it might be defended , or however distant it may seem .
the only thing that astonished dartagnan was that his friends had never thought of this .
he was thinking by himself , and even seriously racking his brain to find a direction for this single force four times multiplied , with which he did not doubt , as with the lever for which archimedes sought , they should succeed in moving the world , when someone tapped gently at his door .
dartagnan awakened planchet and ordered him to open it .
from this phrase , " dartagnan awakened planchet , " the reader must not suppose it was night , or that day was hardly come .
no , it had just struck four .
planchet , two hours before , had asked his master for some dinner , and he had answered him with the proverb , " he who sleeps , dines . "
and planchet dined by sleeping .
a man was introduced of simple mien , who had the appearance of a tradesman .
planchet , by way of dessert , would have liked to hear the conversation ; but the citizen declared to dartagnan that what he had to say being important and confidential , he desired to be left alone with him .
dartagnan dismissed planchet , and requested his visitor to be seated .
there was a moment of silence , during which the two men looked at each other , as if to make a preliminary acquaintance , after which dartagnan bowed , as a sign that he listened .
" i have heard monsieur dartagnan spoken of as a very brave young man , " said the citizen ; " and this reputation which he justly enjoys had decided me to confide a secret to him . "
" speak , monsieur , speak , " said dartagnan , who instinctively scented something advantageous .
the citizen made a fresh pause and continued , " i have a wife who is seamstress to the queen , monsieur , and who is not deficient in either virtue or beauty .
i was induced to marry her about three years ago , although she had but very little dowry , because monsieur laporte , the queen s cloak bearer , is her godfather , and befriends her . "
" well , monsieur ? " asked dartagnan .
" well ! " resumed the citizen , " well , monsieur , my wife was abducted yesterday morning , as she was coming out of her workroom . "
" and by whom was your wife abducted ? "
" i know nothing surely , monsieur , but i suspect someone . "
" and who is the person whom you suspect ? "
" a man who has pursued her a long time . "
" the devil ! "
" but allow me to tell you , monsieur , " continued the citizen , " that i am convinced that there is less love than politics in all this . "
" less love than politics , " replied dartagnan , with a reflective air ; " and what do you suspect ? "
" i do not know whether i ought to tell you what i suspect . "
" monsieur , i beg you to observe that i ask you absolutely nothing .
it is you who have come to me .
it is you who have told me that you had a secret to confide in me .
act , then , as you think proper ; there is still time to withdraw . "
" no , monsieur , no ; you appear to be an honest young man , and i will have confidence in you .
" ah , ah ! can it be on account of the amours of madame de bois - tracy ? " said dartagnan , wishing to have the air , in the eyes of the citizen , of being posted as to court affairs .
" higher , monsieur , higher . "
" of madame daiguillon ? "
" still higher . "
" of madame de chevreuse ? "
" of the-- " dartagnan checked himself .
" yes , monsieur , " replied the terrified citizen , in a tone so low that he was scarcely audible .
" and with whom ? "
" with whom can it be , if not the duke of-- "
" the duke of-- "
" yes , monsieur , " replied the citizen , giving a still fainter intonation to his voice .
" but how do you know all this ? "
" how do i know it ? "
" yes , how do you know it ?
no half - confidence , or -- you understand ! "
" i know it from my wife , monsieur -- from my wife herself . "
" who learns it from whom ? "
" from monsieur laporte .
did i not tell you that she was the goddaughter of monsieur laporte , the confidential man of the queen ?
well , monsieur laporte placed her near her majesty in order that our poor queen might at least have someone in whom she could place confidence , abandoned as she is by the king , watched as she is by the cardinal , betrayed as she is by everybody . " " ah , ah !
it begins to develop itself , " said dartagnan .
" now , my wife came home four days ago , monsieur . one of her conditions was that she should come and see me twice a week ; for , as i had the honor to tell you , my wife loves me dearly -- my wife , then , came and confided to me that the queen at that very moment entertained great fears . "
" truly ! "
" yes . the cardinal , as it appears , pursues he and persecutes her more than ever .
he can not pardon her the history of the saraband .
you know the history of the saraband ? "
" pardieu ! know it ! " replied dartagnan , who knew nothing about it , but who wished to appear to know everything that was going on .
" so that now it is no longer hatred , but vengeance . "
" indeed ! "
" and the queen believes-- "
" well , what does the queen believe ? "
" she believes that someone has written to the duke of buckingham in her name . "
" in the queen s name ? "
" yes , to make him come to paris ; and when once come to paris , to draw him into some snare . "
" the devil ! but your wife , monsieur , what has she to do with all this ? "
" her devotion to the queen is known ; and they wish either to remove her from her mistress , or to intimidate her , in order to obtain her majesty s secrets , or to seduce her and make use of her as a spy . "
" that is likely , " said dartagnan ; " but the man who has abducted her -- do you know him ? "
" i have told you that i believe i know him . "
" his name ? "
" i do not know that ; what i do know is that he is a creature of the cardinal , his evil genius . "
" but you have seen him ? "
" yes , my wife pointed him out to me one day . "
" has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognize him ? "
" oh , certainly ; he is a noble of very lofty carriage , black hair , swarthy complexion , piercing eye , white teeth , and has a scar on his temple . "
" a scar on his temple ! " cried dartagnan ; " and with that , white teeth , a piercing eye , dark complexion , black hair , and haughty carriage -- why , that s my man of meung . "
" he is your man , do you say ? "
" yes , yes ; but that has nothing to do with it .
no , i am wrong . on the contrary , that simplifies the matter greatly . if your man is mine , with one blow i shall obtain two revenges , that s all ; but where to find this man ? "
" i know not . "
" have you no information as to his abiding place ? "
" none . one day , as i was conveying my wife back to the louvre , he was coming out as she was going in , and she showed him to me . "
" the devil ! the devil ! " murmured dartagnan ; " all this is vague enough . from whom have you learned of the abduction of your wife ? "
" from monsieur laporte . "
" did he give you any details ? "
" he knew none himself . "
" and you have learned nothing from any other quarter ? "
" yes , i have received-- "
" what ? "
" i fear i am committing a great imprudence . "
" you always come back to that ; but i must make you see this time that it is too late to retreat . "
" i do not retreat , mordieu ! " cried the citizen , swearing in order to rouse his courage .
" besides , by the faith of bonacieux-- "
" you call yourself bonacieux ? " interrupted dartagnan .
" yes , that is my name . "
" you said , then , by the word of bonacieux . pardon me for interrupting you , but it appears to me that that name is familiar to me . "
" possibly , monsieur .
i am your landlord . "
" ah , ah ! " said dartagnan , half rising and bowing ; " you are my landlord ? "
" yes , monsieur , yes .
and as it is three months since you have been here , and though , distracted as you must be in your important occupations , you have forgotten to pay me my rent -- as , i say , i have not tormented you a single instant , i thought you would appreciate my delicacy . "
" how can it be otherwise , my dear bonacieux ? " replied dartagnan ; " trust me , i am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct , and if , as i told you , i can be of any service to you-- "
" finish , then , what you were about to say . "
the citizen took a paper from his pocket , and presented it to dartagnan .
" a letter ? " said the young man .
" which i received this morning . "
dartagnan opened it , and as the day was beginning to decline , he approached the window to read it .
the citizen followed him .
"  do not seek your wife ,  " read dartagnan ; "  she will be restored to you when there is no longer occasion for her .
if you make a single step to find her you are lost . 
" that s pretty positive , " continued dartagnan ; " but after all , it is but a menace . "
" yes ; but that menace terrifies me . i am not a fighting man at all , monsieur , and i am afraid of the bastille . "
" hum ! " said dartagnan . " i have no greater regard for the bastille than you .
if it were nothing but a sword thrust , why then-- "
" i have counted upon you on this occasion , monsieur . "
" yes ? "
" seeing you constantly surrounded by musketeers of a very superb appearance , and knowing that these musketeers belong to monsieur de treville , and were consequently enemies of the cardinal , i thought that you and your friends , while rendering justice to your poor queen , would be pleased to play his eminence an ill turn . "
" without doubt . "
" and then i have thought that considering three months  lodging , about which i have said nothing-- "
" yes , yes ; you have already given me that reason , and i find it excellent . "
" reckoning still further , that as long as you do me the honor to remain in my house i shall never speak to you about rent-- "
" very kind ! "
" and adding to this , if there be need of it , meaning to offer you fifty pistoles , if , against all probability , you should be short at the present moment . "
" admirable ! you are rich then , my dear monsieur bonacieux ? "
" i am comfortably off , monsieur , that s all ; i have scraped together some such thing as an income of two or three thousand crown in the haberdashery business , but more particularly in venturing some funds in the last voyage of the celebrated navigator jean moquet ; so that you understand , monsieur -- but-- " cried the citizen .
" what ! " demanded dartagnan .
" whom do i see yonder ? "
" where ? "
" in the street , facing your window , in the embrasure of that door -- a man wrapped in a cloak . "
" it is he ! " cried dartagnan and the citizen at the same time , each having recognized his man .
" ah , this time , " cried dartagnan , springing to his sword , " this time he will not escape me ! "
drawing his sword from its scabbard , he rushed out of the apartment .
on the staircase he met athos and porthos , who were coming to see him .
they separated , and dartagnan rushed between them like a dart .
" pah ! where are you going ? " cried the two musketeers in a breath .
" the man of meung ! " replied dartagnan , and disappeared .
dartagnan had more than once related to his friends his adventure with the stranger , as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner , to whom this man had confided some important missive .
the opinion of athos was that dartagnan had lost his letter in the skirmish .
porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting , given by a lady to a cavalier , or by a cavalier to a lady , which had been disturbed by the presence of dartagnan and his yellow horse .
aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious , it was better not to fathom them .
they understood , then , from the few words which escaped from dartagnan , what affair was in hand , and as they thought that overtaking his man , or losing sight of him , dartagnan would return to his rooms , they kept on their way .
9 dartagnan shows himself
as athos and porthos had foreseen , at the expiration of a half hour , dartagnan returned .
he had again missed his man , who had disappeared as if by enchantment .
dartagnan had run , sword in hand , through all the neighboring streets , but had found nobody resembling the man he sought for . then he came back to the point where , perhaps , he ought to have begun , and that was to knock at the door against which the stranger had leaned ; but this proved useless -- for though he knocked ten or twelve times in succession , no one answered , and some of the neighbors , who put their noses out of their windows or were brought to their doors by the noise , had assured him that that house , all the openings of which were tightly closed , had not been inhabited for six months .
while dartagnan was running through the streets and knocking at doors , aramis had joined his companions ; so that on returning home dartagnan found the reunion complete .
" well ! " cried the three musketeers all together , on seeing dartagnan enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his countenance upset with anger .
" well ! " cried he , throwing his sword upon the bed , " this man must be the devil in person ; he has disappeared like a phantom , like a shade , like a specter . "
" do you believe in apparitions ? " asked athos of porthos .
" i never believe in anything i have not seen , and as i never have seen apparitions , i do nt believe in them . "
" the bible , " said aramis , " make our belief in them a law ; the ghost of samuel appeared to saul , and it is an article of faith that i should be very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon , porthos . "
" at all events , man or devil , body or shadow , illusion or reality , this man is born for my damnation ; for his flight has caused us to miss a glorious affair , gentlemen -- an affair by which there were a hundred pistoles , and perhaps more , to be gained . "
" how is that ? " cried porthos and aramis in a breath .
as to athos , faithful to his system of reticence , he contented himself with interrogating dartagnan by a look .
" planchet , " said dartagnan to his domestic , who just then insinuated his head through the half - open door in order to catch some fragments of the conversation , " go down to my landlord , monsieur bonacieux , and ask him to send me half a dozen bottles of beaugency wine ; i prefer that . "
" ah , ah ! you have credit with your landlord , then ? " asked porthos .
" yes , " replied dartagnan , " from this very day ; and mind , if the wine is bad , we will send him to find better . "
" we must use , and not abuse , " said aramis , sententiously .
" i always said that dartagnan had the longest head of the four , " said athos , who , having uttered his opinion , to which dartagnan replied with a bow , immediately resumed his accustomed silence .
" but come , what is this about ? " asked porthos .
" yes , " said aramis , " impart it to us , my dear friend , unless the honor of any lady be hazarded by this confidence ; in that case you would do better to keep it to yourself . "
" be satisfied , " replied dartagnan ; " the honor of no one will have cause to complain of what i have to tell . "
he then related to his friends , word for word , all that had passed between him and his host , and how the man who had abducted the wife of his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had had the difference at the hostelry of the jolly miller .
" your affair is not bad , " said athos , after having tasted like a connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine good ; " and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man .
then there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty pistoles are worth the risk of four heads . "
" but observe , " cried dartagnan , " that there is a woman in the affair -- a woman carried off , a woman who is doubtless threatened , tortured perhaps , and all because she is faithful to her mistress . "
" beware , dartagnan , beware , " said aramis . " you grow a little too warm , in my opinion , about the fate of madame bonacieux .
woman was created for our destruction , and it is from her we inherit all our miseries . "
at this speech of aramis , the brow of athos became clouded and he bit his lips .
" it is not madame bonacieux about whom i am anxious , " cried dartagnan , " but the queen , whom the king abandons , whom the cardinal persecutes , and who sees the heads of all her friends fall , one after the other . "
" why does she love what we hate most in the world , the spaniards and the english ? "
" spain is her country , " replied dartagnan ; " and it is very natural that she should love the spanish , who are the children of the same soil as herself .
as to the second reproach , i have heard it said that she does not love the english , but an englishman . "
" well , and by my faith , " said athos , " it must be acknowledged that this englishman is worthy of being loved .
i never saw a man with a nobler air than his . "
" without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can , " said porthos .
" i was at the louvre on the day when he scattered his pearls ; and , pardieu , i picked up two that i sold for ten pistoles each .
do you know him , aramis ? "
" as well as you do , gentlemen ; for i was among those who seized him in the garden at amiens , into which monsieur putange , the queen s equerry , introduced me .
i was at school at the time , and the adventure appeared to me to be cruel for the king . "
" and did the mercer * , " rejoined athos , " tell you , dartagnan , that the queen thought that buckingham had been brought over by a forged letter ? "
_ * haberdasher _
" wait a minute , then , " said aramis .
" what for ? " demanded porthos .
" go on , while i endeavor to recall circumstances . "
" and now i am convinced , " said dartagnan , " that this abduction of the queen s woman is connected with the events of which we are speaking , and perhaps with the presence of buckingham in paris . "
" the gascon is full of ideas , " said porthos , with admiration .
" i like to hear him talk , " said athos ; " his dialect amuses me . "
" gentlemen , " cried aramis , " listen to this . "
" listen to aramis , " said his three friends .
" yesterday i was at the house of a doctor of theology , whom i sometimes consult about my studies . "
athos smiled .
" he resides in a quiet quarter , " continued aramis ; " his tastes and his profession require it .
now , at the moment when i left his house-- "
here aramis paused .
" well , " cried his auditors ; " at the moment you left his house ? "
aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort , like a man who , in the full relation of a falsehood , finds himself stopped by some unforeseen obstacle ; but the eyes of his three companions were fixed upon him , their ears were wide open , and there were no means of retreat .
" this doctor has a niece , " continued aramis .
" ah , he has a niece ! " interrupted porthos .
" a very respectable lady , " said aramis .
the three friends burst into laughter .
" ah , if you laugh , if you doubt me , " replied aramis , " you shall know nothing . "
" we believe like mohammedans , and are as mute as tombstones , " said athos .
" i will continue , then , " resumed aramis .
" this niece comes sometimes to see her uncle ; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that i was , and it was my duty to offer to conduct her to her carriage . "
" ah ! she has a carriage , then , this niece of the doctor ? " interrupted porthos , one of whose faults was a great looseness of tongue . " a nice acquaintance , my friend ! "
" porthos , " replied aramis , " i have had the occasion to observe to you more than once that you are very indiscreet ; and that is injurious to you among the women . "
" gentlemen , gentlemen , " cried dartagnan , who began to get a glimpse of the result of the adventure , " the thing is serious . let us try not to jest , if we can .
go on aramis , go on . "
" the same , perhaps , " said he .
" possibly , " continued aramis , " came toward me , accompanied by five or six men who followed about ten paces behind him ; and in the politest tone ,  monsieur duke ,  said he to me ,  and you madame ,  continued he , addressing the lady on my arm-- "
" the doctor s niece ? "
" hold your tongue , porthos , " said athos ; " you are insupportable . "
"  --will you enter this carriage , and that without offering the least resistance , without making the least noise ?  "
" he took you for buckingham ! " cried dartagnan .
" i believe so , " replied aramis .
" but the lady ? " asked porthos .
" he took her for the queen ! " said dartagnan .
" just so , " replied aramis .
" the gascon is the devil ! " cried athos ; " nothing escapes him . "
" the fact is , " said porthos , " aramis is of the same height , and something of the shape of the duke ; but it nevertheless appears to me that the dress of a musketeer-- "
" i wore an enormous cloak , " said aramis .
" in the month of july ? the devil ! " said porthos . " is the doctor afraid that you may be recognized ? "
" i can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the person ; but the face-- "
" i had a large hat , " said aramis .
" oh , good lord , " cried porthos , " what precautions for the study of theology ! "
" gentlemen , gentlemen , " said dartagnan , " do not let us lose our time in jesting . let us separate , and let us seek the mercer s wife -- that is the key of the intrigue . "
" a woman of such inferior condition ! can you believe so ? " said porthos , protruding his lips with contempt .
" she is goddaughter to laporte , the confidential valet of the queen .
high heads expose themselves from afar , and the cardinal is longsighted . "
" well , " said porthos , " in the first place make a bargain with the mercer , and a good bargain . "
" that s useless , " said dartagnan ; " for i believe if he does not pay us , we shall be well enough paid by another party . "
at this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon the stairs ; the door was thrown violently open , and the unfortunate mercer rushed into the chamber in which the council was held .
" save me , gentlemen , for the love of heaven , save me ! " cried he .
" there are four men come to arrest me . save me ! save me ! "
porthos and aramis arose .
" a moment , " cried dartagnan , making them a sign to replace in the scabbard their half - drawn swords . " it is not courage that is needed ; it is prudence . "
" and yet , " cried porthos , " we will not leave-- "
" you will leave dartagnan to act as he thinks proper , " said athos . " he has , i repeat , the longest head of the four , and for my part i declare that i will obey him .
do as you think best , dartagnan . "
at this moment the four guards appeared at the door of the antechamber , but seeing four musketeers standing , and their swords by their sides , they hesitated about going farther .
" come in , gentlemen , come in , " called dartagnan ; " you are here in my apartment , and we are all faithful servants of the king and cardinal . "
" then , gentlemen , you will not oppose our executing the orders we have received ? " asked one who appeared to be the leader of the party .
" on the contrary , gentlemen , we would assist you if it were necessary . "
" what does he say ? " grumbled porthos .
" you are a simpleton , " said athos .
" silence ! " " but you promised me-- " whispered the poor mercer .
" we can only save you by being free ourselves , " replied dartagnan , in a rapid , low tone ; " and if we appear inclined to defend you , they will arrest us with you . "
" it seems , nevertheless-- "
" come , gentlemen , come ! " said dartagnan , aloud ; " i have no motive for defending monsieur .
i saw him today for the first time , and he can tell you on what occasion ; he came to demand the rent of my lodging .
is that not true , monsieur bonacieux ?
answer ! "
" that is the very truth , " cried the mercer ; " but monsieur does not tell you-- "
" silence , with respect to me , silence , with respect to my friends ; silence about the queen , above all , or you will ruin everybody without saving yourself !
come , come , gentlemen , remove the fellow . "
and dartagnan pushed the half - stupefied mercer among the guards , saying to him , " you are a shabby old fellow , my dear .
you come to demand money of me -- of a musketeer ! to prison with him !
gentlemen , once more , take him to prison , and keep him under key as long as possible ; that will give me time to pay him . "
the officers were full of thanks , and took away their prey .
as they were going down dartagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of their leader .
" may i not drink to your health , and you to mine ? " said dartagnan , filling two glasses with the beaugency wine which he had obtained from the liberality of m. bonacieux .
" that will do me great honor , " said the leader of the posse , " and i accept thankfully . "
" then to yours , monsieur -- what is your name ? "
" boisrenard . "
" monsieur boisrenard . "
" to yours , my gentlemen ! what is your name , in your turn , if you please ? "
" dartagnan . "
" to yours , monsieur . "
" and above all others , " cried dartagnan , as if carried away by his enthusiasm , " to that of the king and the cardinal . "
the leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of dartagnan if the wine had been bad ; but the wine was good , and he was convinced .
" what diabolical villainy you have performed here , " said porthos , when the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found themselves alone .
" shame , shame , for four musketeers to allow an unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst !
and a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff ! "
" porthos , " said aramis , " athos has already told you that you are a simpleton , and i am quite of his opinion .
dartagnan , you are a great man ; and when you occupy monsieur de treville s place , i will come and ask your influence to secure me an abbey . "
" well , i am in a maze , " said porthos ; " do you approve of what dartagnan has done ? "
" parbleu ! indeed i do , " said athos ; " i not only approve of what he has done , but i congratulate him upon it . "
" and now , gentlemen , " said dartagnan , without stopping to explain his conduct to porthos , " all for one , one for all -- that is our motto , is it not ? "
" and yet-- " said porthos .
" hold out your hand and swear ! " cried athos and aramis at once .
overcome by example , grumbling to himself , nevertheless , porthos stretched out his hand , and the four friends repeated with one voice the formula dictated by dartagnan :
" all for one , one for all . "
" that s well ! now let us everyone retire to his own home , " said dartagnan , as if he had done nothing but command all his life ; " and attention ! for from this moment we are at feud with the cardinal . "
10 a mousetrap in the seventeenth century
the invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days ; as soon as societies , in forming , had invented any kind of police , that police invented mousetraps .
as perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the rue de jerusalem , and as it is fifteen years since we applied this word for the first time to this thing , allow us to explain to them what is a mousetrap . when in a house , of whatever kind it may be , an individual suspected of any crime is arrested , the arrest is held secret . four or five men are placed in ambuscade in the first room . the door is opened to all who knock . it is closed after them , and they are arrested ; so that at the end of two or three days they have in their power almost all the habitues of the establishment .
and that is a mousetrap . the apartment of m. bonacieux , then , became a mousetrap ; and whoever appeared there was taken and interrogated by the cardinal s people .
it must be observed that as a separate passage led to the first floor , in which dartagnan lodged , those who called on him were exempted from this detention .
besides , nobody came thither but the three musketeers ; they had all been engaged in earnest search and inquiries , but had discovered nothing .
athos had even gone so far as to question m. de treville -- a thing which , considering the habitual reticence of the worthy musketeer , had very much astonished his captain .
but m. de treville knew nothing , except that the last time he had seen the cardinal , the king , and the queen , the cardinal looked very thoughtful , the king uneasy , and the redness of the queen s eyes donated that she had been sleepless or tearful .
but this last circumstance was not striking , as the queen since her marriage had slept badly and wept much .
m de treville requested athos , whatever might happen , to be observant of his duty to the king , but particularly to the queen , begging him to convey his desires to his comrades .
as to dartagnan , he did not budge from his apartment .
he converted his chamber into an observatory .
from his windows he saw all the visitors who were caught . then , having removed a plank from his floor , and nothing remaining but a simple ceiling between him and the room beneath , in which the interrogatories were made , he heard all that passed between the inquisitors and the accused .
has monsieur bonacieux sent anything to you for his wife , or for any other person ?
has either of them confided anything to you by word of mouth ? "
" if they knew anything , they would not question people in this manner , " said dartagnan to himself .
" now , what is it they want to know ?
why , they want to know if the duke of buckingham is in paris , and if he has had , or is likely to have , an interview with the queen . "
dartagnan held onto this idea , which , from what he had heard , was not wanting in probability .
in the meantime , the mousetrap continued in operation , and likewise dartagnan s vigilance .
on the evening of the day after the arrest of poor bonacieux , as athos had just left dartagnan to report at m. de treville s , as nine oclock had just struck , and as planchet , who had not yet made the bed , was beginning his task , a knocking was heard at the street door . the door was instantly opened and shut ; someone was taken in the mousetrap .
dartagnan flew to his hole , laid himself down on the floor at full length , and listened .
cries were soon heard , and then moans , which someone appeared to be endeavoring to stifle .
" the devil ! " said dartagnan to himself .
in spite of his prudence , dartagnan restrained himself with great difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going on below .
" but i tell you that i am the mistress of the house , gentlemen ! i tell you i am madame bonacieux ; i tell you i belong to the queen ! " cried the unfortunate woman .
" can i be so lucky as to find what everybody is seeking for ? "
the voice became more and more indistinct ; a tumultuous movement shook the partition .
the victim resisted as much as a woman could resist four men .
" pardon , gentlemen -- par-- " murmured the voice , which could now only be heard in inarticulate sounds .
" they are binding her ; they are going to drag her away , " cried dartagnan to himself , springing up from the floor .
" my sword ! good , it is by my side !
planchet ! "
" monsieur . "
" run and seek athos , porthos and aramis .
one of the three will certainly be at home , perhaps all three .
tell them to take arms , to come here , and to run !
ah , i remember , athos is at monsieur de treville s . "
" but where are you going , monsieur , where are you going ? "
you will kill yourself , " cried planchet .
" hold your tongue , stupid fellow , " said dartagnan ; and laying hold of the casement , he let himself gently down from the first story , which fortunately was not very elevated , without doing himself the slightest injury .
the knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man before the tumult ceased , steps approached , the door was opened , and dartagnan , sword in hand , rushed into the rooms of m. bonacieux , the door of which doubtless acted upon by a spring , closed after him .
then those who dwelt in bonacieux s unfortunate house , together with the nearest neighbors , heard loud cries , stamping of feet , clashing of swords , and breaking of furniture .
a moment after , those who , surprised by this tumult , had gone to their windows to learn the cause of it , saw the door open , and four men , clothed in black , not come out of it , but fly , like so many frightened crows , leaving on the ground and on the corners of the furniture , feathers from their wings ; that is to say , patches of their clothes and fragments of their cloaks .
dartagnan was conqueror -- without much effort , it must be confessed , for only one of the officers was armed , and even he defended himself for form s sake .
it is true that the three others had endeavored to knock the young man down with chairs , stools , and crockery ; but two or three scratches made by the gascon s blade terrified them .
ten minutes sufficed for their defeat , and dartagnan remained master of the field of battle .
the neighbors who had opened their windows , with the coolness peculiar to the inhabitants of paris in these times of perpetual riots and disturbances , closed them again as soon as they saw the four men in black flee -- their instinct telling them that for the time all was over .
besides , it began to grow late , and then , as today , people went to bed early in the quarter of the luxembourg .
on being left alone with mme . bonacieux , dartagnan turned toward her ; the poor woman reclined where she had been left , half - fainting upon an armchair .
dartagnan examined her with a rapid glance .
she was a charming woman of twenty - five or twenty - six years , with dark hair , blue eyes , and a nose slightly turned up , admirable teeth , and a complexion marbled with rose and opal .
there , however , ended the signs which might have confounded her with a lady of rank .
the hands were white , but without delicacy ; the feet did not bespeak the woman of quality .
happily , dartagnan was not yet acquainted with such niceties .
from that time , dartagnan had been cautious with respect to handkerchiefs with arms on them , and he therefore placed in the pocket of mme . bonacieux the one he had just picked up .
at that moment mme . bonacieux recovered her senses .
she opened her eyes , looked around her with terror , saw that the apartment was empty and that she was alone with her liberator .
she extended her hands to him with a smile .
mme . bonacieux had the sweetest smile in the world .
" ah , monsieur ! " said she , " you have saved me ; permit me to thank you . "
" madame , " said dartagnan , " i have only done what every gentleman would have done in my place ; you owe me no thanks . "
" oh , yes , monsieur , oh , yes ; and i hope to prove to you that you have not served an ingrate .
but what could these men , whom i at first took for robbers , want with me , and why is monsieur bonacieux not here ? "
" madame , those men were more dangerous than any robbers could have been , for they are the agents of the cardinal ; and as to your husband , monsieur bonacieux , he is not here because he was yesterday evening conducted to the bastille . "
" my husband in the bastille ! " cried mme . bonacieux . " oh , my god ! what has he done ? poor dear man , he is innocence itself ! "
and something like a faint smile lighted the still - terrified features of the young woman .
" what has he done , madame ? " said dartagnan .
" i believe that his only crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and the misfortune to be your husband . "
" but , monsieur , you know then-- "
" i know that you have been abducted , madame . "
" and by whom ?
do you know him ?
oh , if you know him , tell me ! "
" by a man of from forty to forty - five years , with black hair , a dark complexion , and a scar on his left temple . "
" that is he , that is he ; but his name ? "
" ah , his name ? i do not know that . "
" and did my husband know i had been carried off ? "
" he was informed of it by a letter , written to him by the abductor himself . "
" and does he suspect , " said mme . bonacieux , with some embarrassment , " the cause of this event ? "
" he attributed it , i believe , to a political cause . "
" i doubted from the first ; and now i think entirely as he does .
then my dear monsieur bonacieux has not suspected me a single instant ? "
" so far from it , madame , he was too proud of your prudence , and above all , of your love . "
a second smile , almost imperceptible , stole over the rosy lips of the pretty young woman .
" but , " continued dartagnan , " how did you escape ? "
" i took advantage of a moment when they left me alone ; and as i had known since morning the reason of my abduction , with the help of the sheets i let myself down from the window . then , as i believed my husband would be at home , i hastened hither . "
" to place yourself under his protection ? "
" oh , no , poor dear man ! i knew very well that he was incapable of defending me ; but as he could serve us in other ways , i wished to inform him . "
" of what ? "
" oh , that is not my secret ; i must not , therefore , tell you . "
" besides , " said dartagnan , " pardon me , madame , if , guardsman as i am , i remind you of prudence -- besides , i believe we are not here in a very proper place for imparting confidences .
the men i have put to flight will return reinforced ; if they find us here , we are lost .
i have sent for three of my friends , but who knows whether they were at home ? " " yes , yes !
you are right , " cried the affrighted mme . bonacieux ; " let us fly ! let us save ourselves . "
at these words she passed her arm under that of dartagnan , and urged him forward eagerly .
" but whither shall we fly -- whither escape ? "
" let us first withdraw from this house ; afterward we shall see . "
the young woman and the young man , without taking the trouble to shut the door after them , descended the rue des fossoyeurs rapidly , turned into the rue des fosses - monsieur - le - prince , and did not stop till they came to the place st . sulpice .
" and now what are we to do , and where do you wish me to conduct you ? " asked dartagnan .
" i am at quite a loss how to answer you , i admit , " said mme . bonacieux . " my intention was to inform monsieur laporte , through my husband , in order that monsieur laporte might tell us precisely what had taken place at the louvre in the last three days , and whether there is any danger in presenting myself there . "
" but i , " said dartagnan , " can go and inform monsieur laporte . "
" no doubt you could , only there is one misfortune , and that is that monsieur bonacieux is known at the louvre , and would be allowed to pass ; whereas you are not known there , and the gate would be closed against you . "
" ah , bah ! " said dartagnan ; " you have at some wicket of the louvre a concierge who is devoted to you , and who , thanks to a password , would-- "
mme . bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man .
" and if i give you this password , " said she , " would you forget it as soon as you used it ? "
" by my honor , by the faith of a gentleman ! " said dartagnan , with an accent so truthful that no one could mistake it .
" then i believe you . you appear to be a brave young man ; besides , your fortune may perhaps be the result of your devotedness . "
" i will do , without a promise and voluntarily , all that i can do to serve the king and be agreeable to the queen . dispose of me , then , as a friend . "
" but i -- where shall i go meanwhile ? "
" is there nobody from whose house monsieur laporte can come and fetch you ? "
" no , i can trust nobody . "
" stop , " said dartagnan ; " we are near athos s door .
yes , here it is . "
" who is this athos ? "
" one of my friends . "
" but if he should be at home and see me ? "
" he is not at home , and i will carry away the key , after having placed you in his apartment . "
" but if he should return ? "
" but that will compromise me sadly , you know . " " of what consequence ?
" come , then , let us go to your friend s house .
where does he live ? "
" rue ferou , two steps from here . "
" let us go ! "
both resumed their way .
as dartagnan had foreseen , athos was not within . he took the key , which was customarily given him as one of the family , ascended the stairs , and introduced mme . bonacieux into the little apartment of which we have given a description .
" that is well , " said mme . bonacieux . " now , in my turn , let me give you my instructions . "
" i am all attention . "
" present yourself at the wicket of the louvre , on the side of the rue de lechelle , and ask for germain . "
" well , and then ? "
" he will ask you what you want , and you will answer by these two words ,  tours  and  bruxelles . 
he will at once put himself at your orders . "
" and what shall i command him ? "
" to go and fetch monsieur laporte , the queen s valet de chambre . "
" and when he shall have informed him , and monsieur laporte is come ? "
" you will send him to me . "
" that is well ; but where and how shall i see you again ? "
" do you wish to see me again ? "
" certainly . "
" well , let that care be mine , and be at ease . "
" i depend upon your word . "
" you may . "
dartagnan bowed to mme . bonacieux , darting at her the most loving glance that he could possibly concentrate upon her charming little person ; and while he descended the stairs , he heard the door closed and double - locked .
in two bounds he was at the louvre ; as he entered the wicket of lechelle , ten oclock struck .
all the events we have described had taken place within a half hour .
everything fell out as mme . bonacieux prophesied .
on hearing the password , germain bowed . in a few minutes , laporte was at the lodge ; in two words dartagnan informed him where mme . bonacieux was .
laporte assured himself , by having it twice repeated , of the accurate address , and set off at a run .
hardly , however , had he taken ten steps before he returned .
" young man , " said he to dartagnan , " a suggestion . "
" what ? "
" you may get into trouble by what has taken place . "
" you believe so ? "
" yes .
have you any friend whose clock is too slow ? "
" well ? "
" go and call upon him , in order that he may give evidence of your having been with him at half past nine .
dartagnan found his advice prudent .
he took to his heels , and was soon at m. de treville s ; but instead of going into the saloon with the rest of the crowd , he asked to be introduced to m. de treville s office .
as dartagnan so constantly frequented the hotel , no difficulty was made in complying with his request , and a servant went to inform m. de treville that his young compatriot , having something important to communicate , solicited a private audience .
five minutes after , m. de treville was asking dartagnan what he could do to serve him , and what caused his visit at so late an hour .
" pardon me , monsieur , " said dartagnan , who had profited by the moment he had been left alone to put back m. de treville s clock three - quarters of an hour , " but i thought , as it was yet only twenty - five minutes past nine , it was not too late to wait upon you . "
" twenty - five minutes past nine ! " cried m. de treville , looking at the clock ; " why , that s impossible ! "
" look , rather , monsieur , " said dartagnan , " the clock shows it . "
" that s true , " said m. de treville ; " i believed it later .
but what can i do for you ? "
then dartagnan told m. de treville a long history about the queen .
he expressed to him the fears he entertained with respect to her majesty ; he related to him what he had heard of the projects of the cardinal with regard to buckingham , and all with a tranquillity and candor of which m. de treville was the more the dupe , from having himself , as we have said , observed something fresh between the cardinal , the king , and the queen .
11 in which the plot thickens
his visit to m. de treville being paid , the pensive dartagnan took the longest way homeward .
on what was dartagnan thinking , that he strayed thus from his path , gazing at the stars of heaven , and sometimes sighing , sometimes smiling ?
he was thinking of mme . bonacieux .
for an apprentice musketeer the young woman was almost an ideal of love .
dartagnan already fancied himself , so rapid is the flight of our dreams upon the wings of imagination , accosted by a messenger from the young woman , who brought him some billet appointing a meeting , a gold chain , or a diamond .
we have observed that young cavaliers received presents from their king without shame . let us add that in these times of lax morality they had no more delicacy with respect to the mistresses ; and that the latter almost always left them valuable and durable remembrances , as if they essayed to conquer the fragility of their sentiments by the solidity of their gifts .
without a blush , men made their way in the world by the means of women blushing .
such as were only beautiful gave their beauty , whence , without doubt , comes the proverb , " the most beautiful girl in the world can only give what she has . " such as were rich gave in addition a part of their money ; and a vast number of heroes of that gallant period may be cited who would neither have won their spurs in the first place , nor their battles afterward , without the purse , more or less furnished , which their mistress fastened to the saddle bow .
dartagnan owned nothing . provincial diffidence , that slight varnish , the ephemeral flower , that down of the peach , had evaporated to the winds through the little orthodox counsels which the three musketeers gave their friend .
dartagnan , following the strange custom of the times , considered himself at paris as on a campaign , neither more nor less than if he had been in flanders -- spain yonder , woman here .
in each there was an enemy to contend with , and contributions to be levied .
but , we must say , at the present moment dartagnan was ruled by a feeling much more noble and disinterested .
the mercer had said that he was rich ; the young man might easily guess that with so weak a man as m. bonacieux ; and interest was almost foreign to this commencement of love , which had been the consequence of it .
we say almost , for the idea that a young , handsome , kind , and witty woman is at the same time rich takes nothing from the beginning of love , but on the contrary strengthens it .
there are in affluence a crowd of aristocratic cares and caprices which are highly becoming to beauty .
a fine and white stocking , a silken robe , a lace kerchief , a pretty slipper on the foot , a tasty ribbon on the head do not make an ugly woman pretty , but they make a pretty woman beautiful , without reckoning the hands , which gain by all this ; the hands , among women particularly , to be beautiful must be idle .
then dartagnan , as the reader , from whom we have not concealed the state of his fortune , very well knows -- dartagnan was not a millionaire ; he hoped to become one someday , but the time which in his own mind he fixed upon for this happy change was still far distant .
in the meanwhile , how disheartening to see the woman one loves long for those thousands of nothings which constitute a woman s happiness , and be unable to give her those thousands of nothings .
at least , when the woman is rich and the lover is not , that which he can not offer she offers to herself ; and although it is generally with her husband s money that she procures herself this indulgence , the gratitude for it seldom reverts to him .
then dartagnan , disposed to become the most tender of lovers , was at the same time a very devoted friend , in the midst of his amorous projects for the mercer s wife , he did not forget his friends .
the pretty mme . bonacieux was just the woman to walk with in the plain st . denis or in the fair of st . germain , in company with athos , porthos , and aramis , to whom dartagnan had often remarked this .
and m. bonacieux ? whom dartagnan had pushed into the hands of the officers , denying him aloud although he had promised in a whisper to save him .
love is the most selfish of all the passions .
let our readers reassure themselves . if dartagnan forgets his host , or appears to forget him , under the pretense of not knowing where he has been carried , we will not forget him , and we know where he is .
but for the moment , let us do as did the amorous gascon ; we will see after the worthy mercer later .
dartagnan , reflecting on his future amours , addressing himself to the beautiful night , and smiling at the stars , ascended the rue cherish - midi , or chase - midi , as it was then called .
as he found himself in the quarter in which aramis lived , he took it into his head to pay his friend a visit in order to explain the motives which had led him to send planchet with a request that he would come instantly to the mousetrap .
now , if aramis had been at home when planchet came to his abode , he had doubtless hastened to the rue des fossoyeurs , and finding nobody there but his other two companions perhaps , they would not be able to conceive what all this meant .
we must never look for discretion in first love .
first love is accompanied by such excessive joy that unless the joy be allowed to overflow , it will stifle you .
paris for two hours past had been dark , and seemed a desert .
eleven oclock sounded from all the clocks of the faubourg st . germain . it was delightful weather .
dartagnan was passing along a lane on the spot where the rue dassas is now situated , breathing the balmy emanations which were borne upon the wind from the rue de vaugirard , and which arose from the gardens refreshed by the dews of evening and the breeze of night .
from a distance resounded , deadened , however , by good shutters , the songs of the tipplers , enjoying themselves in the cabarets scattered along the plain .
arrived at the end of the lane , dartagnan turned to the left .
the house in which aramis dwelt was situated between the rue cassette and the rue servandoni .
dartagnan had just passed the rue cassette , and already perceived the door of his friend s house , shaded by a mass of sycamores and clematis which formed a vast arch opposite the front of it , when he perceived something like a shadow issuing from the rue servandoni .
this something was enveloped in a cloak , and dartagnan at first believed it was a man ; but by the smallness of the form , the hesitation of the walk , and the indecision of the step , he soon discovered that it was a woman .
further , this woman , as if not certain of the house she was seeking , lifted up her eyes to look around her , stopped , went backward , and then returned again .
dartagnan was perplexed .
" shall i go and offer her my services ? " thought he . " by her step she must be young ; perhaps she is pretty .
oh , yes !
but a woman who wanders in the streets at this hour only ventures out to meet her lover .
if i should disturb a rendezvous , that would not be the best means of commencing an acquaintance . "
meantime the young woman continued to advance , counting the houses and windows .
this was neither long nor difficult .
but on my soul , it looks so .
ah , my dear aramis , this time i shall find you out . "
and dartagnan , making himself as small as he could , concealed himself in the darkest side of the street near a stone bench placed at the back of a niche .
the young woman continued to advance ; and in addition to the lightness of her step , which had betrayed her , she emitted a little cough which denoted a sweet voice .
dartagnan believed this cough to be a signal .
nevertheless , whether the cough had been answered by a similar signal which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker , or whether without this aid she saw that she had arrived at the end of her journey , she resolutely drew near to aramis s shutter , and tapped , at three equal intervals , with her bent finger .
" this is all very fine , dear aramis , " murmured dartagnan . " ah , monsieur hypocrite , i understand how you study theology . "
the three blows were scarcely struck , when the inside blind was opened and a light appeared through the panes of the outside shutter .
" ah , ah ! " said the listener , " not through doors , but through windows ! ah , this visit was expected .
we shall see the windows open , and the lady enter by escalade .
very pretty ! "
but to the great astonishment of dartagnan , the shutter remained closed . still more , the light which had shone for an instant disappeared , and all was again in obscurity .
dartagnan thought this could not last long , and continued to look with all his eyes and listen with all his ears .
he was right ; at the end of some seconds two sharp taps were heard inside .
the young woman in the street replied by a single tap , and the shutter was opened a little way .
it may be judged whether dartagnan looked or listened with avidity .
unfortunately the light had been removed into another chamber ; but the eyes of the young man were accustomed to the night . besides , the eyes of the gascons have , as it is asserted , like those of cats , the faculty of seeing in the dark .
dartagnan then saw that the young woman took from her pocket a white object , which she unfolded quickly , and which took the form of a handkerchief .
she made her interlocutor observe the corner of this unfolded object .
" what the devil could that handkerchief signify ? "
placed where he was , dartagnan could not perceive the face of aramis . we say aramis , because the young man entertained no doubt that it was his friend who held this dialogue from the interior with the lady of the exterior . curiosity prevailed over prudence ; and profiting by the preoccupation into which the sight of the handkerchief appeared to have plunged the two personages now on the scene , he stole from his hiding place , and quick as lightning , but stepping with utmost caution , he ran and placed himself close to the angle of the wall , from which his eye could pierce the interior of aramis s room .
upon gaining this advantage dartagnan was near uttering a cry of surprise ; it was not aramis who was conversing with the nocturnal visitor , it was a woman !
dartagnan , however , could only see enough to recognize the form of her vestments , not enough to distinguish her features .
at the same instant the woman inside drew a second handkerchief from her pocket , and exchanged it for that which had just been shown to her .
then some words were spoken by the two women . at length the shutter closed .
mme . bonacieux !
the suspicion that it was she had crossed the mind of dartagnan when she drew the handkerchief from her pocket ; but what probability was there that mme . bonacieux , who had sent for m. laporte in order to be reconducted to the louvre , should be running about the streets of paris at half past eleven at night , at the risk of being abducted a second time ?
this must be , then , an affair of importance ; and what is the most important affair to a woman of twenty - five !
love .
but was it on her own account , or on account of another , that she exposed herself to such hazards ?
this was a question the young man asked himself , whom the demon of jealousy already gnawed , being in heart neither more nor less than an accepted lover .
there was a very simple means of satisfying himself whither mme . bonacieux was going ; that was to follow her .
this method was so simple that dartagnan employed it quite naturally and instinctively .
but at the sight of the young man , who detached himself from the wall like a statue walking from its niche , and at the noise of the steps which she heard resound behind her , mme . bonacieux uttered a little cry and fled .
dartagnan ran after her . it was not difficult for him to overtake a woman embarrassed with her cloak .
he came up with her before she had traversed a third of the street .
the unfortunate woman was exhausted , not by fatigue , but by terror , and when dartagnan placed his hand upon her shoulder , she sank upon one knee , crying in a choking voice , " kill me , if you please , you shall know nothing ! "
dartagnan raised her by passing his arm round her waist ; but as he felt by her weight she was on the point of fainting , he made haste to reassure her by protestations of devotedness .
these protestations were nothing for mme . bonacieux , for such protestations may be made with the worst intentions in the world ; but the voice was all .
thank god , thank god ! "
" yes , it is i , " said dartagnan , " it is i , whom god has sent to watch over you . "
" was it with that intention you followed me ? " asked the young woman , with a coquettish smile , whose somewhat bantering character resumed its influence , and with whom all fear had disappeared from the moment in which she recognized a friend in one she had taken for an enemy .
" no , " said dartagnan ; " no , i confess it . it was chance that threw me in your way ; i saw a woman knocking at the window of one of my friends . "
" one of your friends ? " interrupted mme . bonacieux .
" without doubt ; aramis is one of my best friends . "
" aramis ! who is he ? "
" come , come , you wo nt tell me you do nt know aramis ? "
" this is the first time i ever heard his name pronounced . "
" it is the first time , then , that you ever went to that house ? "
" undoubtedly . "
" and you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man ? "
" no . "
" by a musketeer ? "
" no , indeed ! "
" it was not he , then , you came to seek ? "
" not the least in the world .
besides , you must have seen that the person to whom i spoke was a woman . "
" that is true ; but this woman is a friend of aramis-- "
" i know nothing of that . "
" --since she lodges with him . "
" that does not concern me . "
" but who is she ? "
" oh , that is not my secret . "
" my dear madame bonacieux , you are charming ; but at the same time you are one of the most mysterious women . "
" do i lose by that ? "
" no ; you are , on the contrary , adorable . "
" give me your arm , then . "
" most willingly .
and now ? "
" now escort me . "
" where ? "
" where i am going . "
" but where are you going ? "
" you will see , because you will leave me at the door . "
" shall i wait for you ? "
" that will be useless . "
" you will return alone , then ? "
" perhaps yes , perhaps no . "
" but will the person who shall accompany you afterward be a man or a woman ? "
" i do nt know yet . "
" but i will know it ! "
" how so ? "
" i will wait until you come out . "
" in that case , adieu . "
" why so ? "
" i do not want you . "
" but you have claimed-- "
" the aid of a gentleman , not the watchfulness of a spy . "
" the word is rather hard . "
" how are they called who follow others in spite of them ? "
" they are indiscreet . "
" the word is too mild . "
" well , madame , i perceive i must do as you wish . "
" why did you deprive yourself of the merit of doing so at once ? "
" is there no merit in repentance ? "
" and do you really repent ? "
" i know nothing about it myself .
but what i know is that i promise to do all you wish if you allow me to accompany you where you are going . "
" and you will leave me then ? "
" yes . "
" without waiting for my coming out again ? "
" yes . "
" word of honor ? "
" by the faith of a gentleman .
take my arm , and let us go . "
dartagnan offered his arm to mme . bonacieux , who willingly took it , half laughing , half trembling , and both gained the top of rue de la harpe .
arriving there , the young woman seemed to hesitate , as she had before done in the rue vaugirard .
she seemed , however , by certain signs , to recognize a door , and approaching that door , " and now , monsieur , " said she , " it is here i have business ; a thousand thanks for your honorable company , which has saved me from all the dangers to which , alone i was exposed .
but the moment is come to keep your word ; i have reached my destination . "
" and you will have nothing to fear on your return ? "
" i shall have nothing to fear but robbers . "
" and that is nothing ? "
" you forget that beautiful handkerchief with the coat of arms . "
" which ? "
" that which i found at your feet , and replaced in your pocket . "
" hold your tongue , imprudent man ! do you wish to destroy me ? "
" you see very plainly that there is still danger for you , since a single word makes you tremble ; and you confess that if that word were heard you would be ruined .
come , come , madame ! " cried dartagnan , seizing her hands , and surveying her with an ardent glance , " come , be more generous . confide in me . have you not read in my eyes that there is nothing but devotion and sympathy in my heart ? "
" yes , " replied mme . bonacieux ; " therefore , ask my own secrets , and i will reveal them to you ; but those of others -- that is quite another thing . "
" very well , " said dartagnan , " i shall discover them ; as these secrets may have an influence over your life , these secrets must become mine . "
" beware of what you do ! " cried the young woman , in a manner so serious as to make dartagnan start in spite of himself .
rather , place faith in what i tell you .
have no more concern about me ; i exist no longer for you , any more than if you had never seen me . "
" must aramis do as much as i , madame ? " said dartagnan , deeply piqued .
" this is the second or third time , monsieur , that you have repeated that name , and yet i have told you that i do not know him . "
" you do not know the man at whose shutter you have just knocked ?
indeed , madame , you believe me too credulous ! "
" confess that it is for the sake of making me talk that you invent this story and create this personage . "
" i invent nothing , madame ; i create nothing . i only speak that exact truth . "
" and you say that one of your friends lives in that house ? "
" i say so , and i repeat it for the third time ; that house is one inhabited by my friend , and that friend is aramis . "
" all this will be cleared up at a later period , " murmured the young woman ; " no , monsieur , be silent . "
" if you could see my heart , " said dartagnan , " you would there read so much curiosity that you would pity me and so much love that you would instantly satisfy my curiosity .
we have nothing to fear from those who love us . "
" you speak very suddenly of love , monsieur , " said the young woman , shaking her head .
" that is because love has come suddenly upon me , and for the first time ; and because i am only twenty . "
the young woman looked at him furtively .
" monsieur , " said the young woman , " you weary me very much , i assure you , with your questions . "
the initials are only mine -- c . b. , constance bonacieux . "
" or camille de bois - tracy . "
" silence , monsieur ! once again , silence !
ah , since the dangers i incur on my own account can not stop you , think of those you may yourself run ! "
" me ? "
" then i will not leave you . "
that is the hour when i am expected . " " madame , " said the young man , bowing ; " i can refuse nothing asked of me thus . be content ; i will depart . "
" but you will not follow me ; you will not watch me ? "
" i will return home instantly . "
" ah , i was quite sure you were a good and brave young man , " said mme . bonacieux , holding out her hand to him , and placing the other upon the knocker of a little door almost hidden in the wall .
dartagnan seized the hand held out to him , and kissed it ardently .
" ah ! i wish i had never seen you ! " cried dartagnan , with that ingenuous roughness which women often prefer to the affectations of politeness , because it betrays the depths of the thought and proves that feeling prevails over reason .
" well ! " resumed mme . bonacieux , in a voice almost caressing , and pressing the hand of dartagnan , who had not relinquished hers , " well : i will not say as much as you do ; what is lost for today may not be lost forever .
who knows , when i shall be at liberty , that i may not satisfy your curiosity ? "
" and will you make the same promise to my love ? " cried dartagnan , beside himself with joy .
" oh , as to that , i do not engage myself . that depends upon the sentiments with which you may inspire me . "
" then today , madame-- "
" oh , today , i am no further than gratitude . " " ah !
you are too charming , " said dartagnan , sorrowfully ; " and you abuse my love . "
" no , i use your generosity , that s all .
but be of good cheer ; with certain people , everything comes round . "
" oh , you render me the happiest of men !
do not forget this evening -- do not forget that promise . "
" be satisfied . in the proper time and place i will remember everything .
now then , go , go , in the name of heaven !
i was expected at sharp midnight , and i am late . "
" by five minutes . "
" yes ; but in certain circumstances five minutes are five ages . "
" when one loves . "
" well ! and who told you i had no affair with a lover ? "
" it is a man , then , who expects you ? " cried dartagnan . " a man ! "
" the discussion is going to begin again ! " said mme . bonacieux , with a half - smile which was not exempt from a tinge of impatience .
" no , no ; i go , i depart ! i believe in you , and i would have all the merit of my devotion , even if that devotion were stupidity .
adieu , madame , adieu ! "
and as if he only felt strength to detach himself by a violent effort from the hand he held , he sprang away , running , while mme . bonacieux knocked , as at the shutter , three light and regular taps . when he had gained the angle of the street , he turned . the door had been opened , and shut again ; the mercer s pretty wife had disappeared .
dartagnan pursued his way . he had given his word not to watch mme . bonacieux , and if his life had depended upon the spot to which she was going or upon the person who should accompany her , dartagnan would have returned home , since he had so promised .
five minutes later he was in the rue des fossoyeurs .
" poor athos ! " said he ; " he will never guess what all this means .
he will have fallen asleep waiting for me , or else he will have returned home , where he will have learned that a woman had been there .
a woman with athos !
after all , " continued dartagnan , " there was certainly one with aramis .
all this is very strange ; and i am curious to know how it will end . "
" badly , monsieur , badly ! " replied a voice which the young man recognized as that of planchet ; for , soliloquizing aloud , as very preoccupied people do , he had entered the alley , at the end of which were the stairs which led to his chamber .
" how badly ? what do you mean by that , you idiot ? " asked dartagnan . " what has happened ? "
" all sorts of misfortunes . "
" what ? "
" in the first place , monsieur athos is arrested . "
" arrested !
athos arrested ! what for ? "
" he was found in your lodging ; they took him for you . "
" and by whom was he arrested ? "
" by guards brought by the men in black whom you put to flight . "
" why did he not tell them his name ? why did he not tell them he knew nothing about this affair ? "
" he took care not to do so , monsieur ; on the contrary , he came up to me and said ,  it is your master that needs his liberty at this moment and not i , since he knows everything and i know nothing .
" bravo , athos ! noble heart ! " murmured dartagnan . " i know him well there !
and what did the officers do ? "
" four conveyed him away , i do nt know where -- to the bastille or fort leveque . two remained with the men in black , who rummaged every place and took all the papers .
the last two mounted guard at the door during this examination ; then , when all was over , they went away , leaving the house empty and exposed . "
" and porthos and aramis ? "
" i could not find them ; they did not come . "
" but they may come any moment , for you left word that i awaited them ? "
" yes , monsieur . "
" well , do nt budge , then ; if they come , tell them what has happened . let them wait for me at the pomme - de - pin . here it would be dangerous ; the house may be watched .
i will run to monsieur de treville to tell them all this , and will meet them there . "
" very well , monsieur , " said planchet .
" but you will remain ; you are not afraid ? " said dartagnan , coming back to recommend courage to his lackey .
" be easy , monsieur , " said planchet ; " you do not know me yet . i am brave when i set about it . it is all in beginning . besides , i am a picard . "
" then it is understood , " said dartagnan ; " you would rather be killed than desert your post ? "
" yes , monsieur ; and there is nothing i would not do to prove to monsieur that i am attached to him . "
" good ! " said dartagnan to himself . " it appears that the method i have adopted with this boy is decidedly the best . i shall use it again upon occasion . "
and with all the swiftness of his legs , already a little fatigued however , with the perambulations of the day , dartagnan directed his course toward m. de treville s .
m de treville was not at his hotel . his company was on guard at the louvre ; he was at the louvre with his company .
it was necessary to reach m. de treville ; it was important that he should be informed of what was passing .
dartagnan resolved to try and enter the louvre .
his costume of guardsman in the company of m. dessessart ought to be his passport .
he therefore went down the rue des petits augustins , and came up to the quay , in order to take the new bridge .
he had at first an idea of crossing by the ferry ; but on gaining the riverside , he had mechanically put his hand into his pocket , and perceived that he had not wherewithal to pay his passage .
as he gained the top of the rue guenegaud , he saw two persons coming out of the rue dauphine whose appearance very much struck him .
of the two persons who composed this group , one was a man and the other a woman .
the woman had the outline of mme . bonacieux ; the man resembled aramis so much as to be mistaken for him .
that was dartagnan s road , as he was going to the louvre . dartagnan followed them .
he had not gone twenty steps before he became convinced that the woman was really mme . bonacieux and that the man was aramis .
he felt at that instant all the suspicions of jealousy agitating his heart .
he felt himself doubly betrayed , by his friend and by her whom he already loved like a mistress .
mme . bonacieux had declared to him , by all the gods , that she did not know aramis ; and a quarter of an hour after having made this assertion , he found her hanging on the arm of aramis .
he considered himself an outraged , betrayed , and ridiculed lover . blood and anger mounted to his face ; he was resolved to unravel the mystery .
the young man and young woman perceived they were watched , and redoubled their speed . dartagnan determined upon his course .
he passed them , then returned so as to meet them exactly before the samaritaine . which was illuminated by a lamp which threw its light over all that part of the bridge .
dartagnan stopped before them , and they stopped before him .
" what do you want , monsieur ? " demanded the musketeer , recoiling a step , and with a foreign accent , which proved to dartagnan that he was deceived in one of his conjectures .
" it is not aramis ! " cried he .
" no , monsieur , it is not aramis ; and by your exclamation i perceive you have mistaken me for another , and pardon you . "
" you pardon me ? " cried dartagnan .
" yes , " replied the stranger .
" you are right , monsieur , it is not with you that i have anything to do ; it is with madame . "
" with madame ! you do not know her , " replied the stranger .
" you are deceived , monsieur ; i know her very well . "
" and i , madame ! " said dartagnan , embarrassed ; " you promised me-- "
" take my arm , madame , " said the stranger , " and let us continue our way . "
dartagnan , however , stupefied , cast down , annihilated by all that happened , stood , with crossed arms , before the musketeer and mme . bonacieux .
the musketeer advanced two steps , and pushed dartagnan aside with his hand .
dartagnan made a spring backward and drew his sword .
at the same time , and with the rapidity of lightning , the stranger drew his .
" in the name of heaven , my lord ! " cried mme . bonacieux , throwing herself between the combatants and seizing the swords with her hands .
" my lord ! " cried dartagnan , enlightened by a sudden idea , " my lord ! pardon me , monsieur , but you are not-- "
" my lord the duke of buckingham , " said mme . bonacieux , in an undertone ; " and now you may ruin us all . "
" you offer me your services ; with the same frankness i accept them . follow us at a distance of twenty paces , as far as the louvre , and if anyone watches us , slay him ! "
dartagnan placed his naked sword under his arm , allowed the duke and mme . bonacieux to take twenty steps ahead , and then followed them , ready to execute the instructions of the noble and elegant minister of charles i.
fortunately , he had no opportunity to give the duke this proof of his devotion , and the young woman and the handsome musketeer entered the louvre by the wicket of the echelle without any interference .
as for dartagnan , he immediately repaired to the cabaret of the pomme - de - pin , where he found porthos and aramis awaiting him .
without giving them any explanation of the alarm and inconvenience he had caused them , he told them that he had terminated the affair alone in which he had for a moment believed he should need their assistance .
meanwhile , carried away as we are by our narrative , we must leave our three friends to themselves , and follow the duke of buckingham and his guide through the labyrinths of the louvre .
12 george villiers , duke of buckingham
mme . bonacieux and the duke entered the louvre without difficulty . mme . bonacieux was known to belong to the queen ; the duke wore the uniform of the musketeers of m. de treville , who , as we have said , were that evening on guard .
she closed the door after her , took the duke by the hand , and after a few experimental steps , grasped a balustrade , put her foot upon the bottom step , and began to ascend the staircase . the duke counted two stories .
she then turned to the right , followed the course of a long corridor , descended a flight , went a few steps farther , introduced a key into a lock , opened a door , and pushed the duke into an apartment lighted only by a lamp , saying , " remain here , my lord duke ; someone will come . "
she then went out by the same door , which she locked , so that the duke found himself literally a prisoner .
nevertheless , isolated as he was , we must say that the duke of buckingham did not experience an instant of fear . one of the salient points of his character was the search for adventures and a love of romance .
brave , rash , and enterprising , this was not the first time he had risked his life in such attempts . he had learned that the pretended message from anne of austria , upon the faith of which he had come to paris , was a snare ; but instead of regaining england , he had , abusing the position in which he had been placed , declared to the queen that he would not depart without seeing her .
the queen had at first positively refused ; but at length became afraid that the duke , if exasperated , would commit some folly .
she had already decided upon seeing him and urging his immediate departure , when , on the very evening of coming to this decision , mme . bonacieux , who was charged with going to fetch the duke and conducting him to the louvre , was abducted .
for two days no one knew what had become of her , and everything remained in suspense ; but once free , and placed in communication with laporte , matters resumed their course , and she accomplished the perilous enterprise which , but for her arrest , would have been executed three days earlier .
buckingham , left alone , walked toward a mirror .
his musketeer s uniform became him marvelously .
at thirty - five , which was then his age , he passed , with just title , for the handsomest gentleman and the most elegant cavalier of france or england .
the favorite of two kings , immensely rich , all - powerful in a kingdom which he disordered at his fancy and calmed again at his caprice , george villiers , duke of buckingham , had lived one of those fabulous existences which survive , in the course of centuries , to astonish posterity .
sure of himself , convinced of his own power , certain that the laws which rule other men could not reach him , he went straight to the object he aimed at , even were this object were so elevated and so dazzling that it would have been madness for any other even to have contemplated it .
it was thus he had succeeded in approaching several times the beautiful and proud anne of austria , and in making himself loved by dazzling her .
george villiers placed himself before the glass , as we have said , restored the undulations to his beautiful hair , which the weight of his hat had disordered , twisted his mustache , and , his heart swelling with joy , happy and proud at being near the moment he had so long sighed for , he smiled upon himself with pride and hope .
at this moment a door concealed in the tapestry opened , and a woman appeared .
buckingham saw this apparition in the glass ; he uttered a cry . it was the queen !
anne of austria was then twenty - six or twenty - seven years of age ; that is to say , she was in the full splendor of her beauty .
her carriage was that of a queen or a goddess ; her eyes , which cast the brilliancy of emeralds , were perfectly beautiful , and yet were at the same time full of sweetness and majesty .
her mouth was small and rosy ; and although her underlip , like that of all princes of the house of austria , protruded slightly beyond the other , it was eminently lovely in its smile , but as profoundly disdainful in its contempt .
her skin was admired for its velvety softness ; her hands and arms were of surpassing beauty , all the poets of the time singing them as incomparable .
lastly , her hair , which , from being light in her youth , had become chestnut , and which she wore curled very plainly , and with much powder , admirably set off her face , in which the most rigid critic could only have desired a little less rouge , and the most fastidious sculptor a little more fineness in the nose .
buckingham remained for a moment dazzled . never had anne of austria appeared to him so beautiful , amid balls , fetes , or carousals , as she appeared to him at this moment , dressed in a simple robe of white satin , and accompanied by donna estafania -- the only one of her spanish women who had not been driven from her by the jealousy of the king or by the persecutions of richelieu .
anne of austria took two steps forward . buckingham threw himself at her feet , and before the queen could prevent him , kissed the hem of her robe .
" duke , you already know that it is not i who caused you to be written to . "
they who love believe easily in love . besides , i have lost nothing by this journey because i see you . "
" yes , " replied anne , " but you know why and how i see you ; because , insensible to all my sufferings , you persist in remaining in a city where , by remaining , you run the risk of your life , and make me run the risk of my honor . i see you to tell you that everything separates us -- the depths of the sea , the enmity of kingdoms , the sanctity of vows .
it is sacrilege to struggle against so many things , my lord .
in short , i see you to tell you that we must never see each other again . "
" speak on , madame , speak on , queen , " said buckingham ; " the sweetness of your voice covers the harshness of your words .
you talk of sacrilege ! why , the sacrilege is the separation of two hearts formed by god for each other . "
" my lord , " cried the queen , " you forget that i have never said that i love you . "
for tell me , where can you find a love like mine -- a love which neither time , nor absence , nor despair can extinguish , a love which contents itself with a lost ribbon , a stray look , or a chance word ?
it is now three years , madame , since i saw you for the first time , and during those three years i have loved you thus .
hold ! hold ! i shut my eyes , and i can see you as you then were ; i open them again , and i see what you are now -- a hundred time more beautiful ! "
" what folly , " murmured anne of austria , who had not the courage to find fault with the duke for having so well preserved her portrait in his heart , " what folly to feed a useless passion with such remembrances ! "
" and upon what then must i live ? i have nothing but memory .
it is my happiness , my treasure , my hope .
every time i see you is a fresh diamond which i enclose in the casket of my heart .
this is the fourth which you have let fall and i have picked up ; for in three years , madame , i have only seen you four times -- the first , which i have described to you ; the second , at the mansion of madame de chevreuse ; the third , in the gardens of amiens . "
" duke , " said the queen , blushing , " never speak of that evening . "
you remember what a beautiful night it was ?
how soft and perfumed was the air ; how lovely the blue heavens and star - enameled sky !
ah , then , madame , i was able for one instant to be alone with you . then you were about to tell me all -- the isolation of your life , the griefs of your heart .
you leaned upon my arm -- upon this , madame !
i felt , in bending my head toward you , your beautiful hair touch my cheek ; and every time that it touched me i trembled from head to foot . oh , queen !
queen ! you do not know what felicity from heaven , what joys from paradise , are comprised in a moment like that .
take my wealth , my fortune , my glory , all the days i have to live , for such an instant , for a night like that . for that night , madame , that night you loved me , i will swear it . "
" my lord , yes ; it is possible that the influence of the place , the charm of the beautiful evening , the fascination of your look -- the thousand circumstances , in short , which sometimes unite to destroy a woman -- were grouped around me on that fatal evening ; but , my lord , you saw the queen come to the aid of the woman who faltered . at the first word you dared to utter , at the first freedom to which i had to reply , i called for help . "
" yes , yes , that is true . and any other love but mine would have sunk beneath this ordeal ; but my love came out from it more ardent and more eternal .
what to me were all the treasures in the world , or all the kings of the earth !
eight days after , i was back again , madame .
" yes , but calumny seized upon all those follies in which i took no part , as you well know , my lord .
the king , excited by the cardinal , made a terrible clamor . madame de vernet was driven from me , putange was exiled , madame de chevreuse fell into disgrace , and when you wished to come back as ambassador to france , the king himself -- remember , my lord -- the king himself opposed to it . "
" yes , and france is about to pay for her king s refusal with a war .
i am not allowed to see you , madame , but you shall every day hear of me .
what object , think you , have this expedition to re and this league with the protestants of la rochelle which i am projecting ?
the pleasure of seeing you .
i have no hope of penetrating , sword in hand , to paris , i know that well . but this war may bring round a peace ; this peace will require a negotiator ; that negotiator will be me .
thousands of men , it is true , will have to pay for my happiness with their lives ; but what is that to me , provided i see you again !
all this is perhaps folly -- perhaps insanity ; but tell me what woman has a lover more truly in love ; what queen a servant more ardent ? "
" my lord , my lord , you invoke in your defense things which accuse you more strongly . all these proofs of love which you would give me are almost crimes . "
" because you do not love me , madame ! if you loved me , you would view all this otherwise . if you loved me , oh , if you loved me , that would be too great happiness , and i should run mad .
" madame de chevreuse was not queen , " murmured anne of austria , overcome , in spite of herself , by the expression of so profound a passion .
" you would love me , then , if you were not queen ! madame , say that you would love me then !
i can believe that it is the dignity of your rank alone which makes you cruel to me ; i can believe that you had been madame de chevreuse , poor buckingham might have hoped . thanks for those sweet words !
oh , my beautiful sovereign , a hundred times , thanks ! "
" oh , my lord !
you have ill understood , wrongly interpreted ; i did not mean to say-- "
" silence , silence ! " cried the duke .
" if i am happy in an error , do not have the cruelty to lift me from it .
" oh , my god ! " cried anne of austria , with an accent of terror which proved how much greater an interest she took in the duke than she ventured to tell .
" i do not tell you this , madame , to terrify you ; no , it is even ridiculous for me to name it to you , and , believe me , i take no heed of such dreams .
but the words you have just spoken , the hope you have almost given me , will have richly paid all -- were it my life . "
" oh , but i , " said anne , " i also , duke , have had presentiments ; i also have had dreams .
i dreamed that i saw you lying bleeding , wounded . "
" in the left side , was it not , and with a knife ? " interrupted buckingham .
" yes , it was so , my lord , it was so -- in the left side , and with a knife .
who can possibly have told you i had had that dream ?
i have imparted it to no one but my god , and that in my prayers . "
" i ask for no more . you love me , madame ; it is enough . "
" i love you , i ? "
" yes , yes .
would god send the same dreams to you as to me if you did not love me ?
should we have the same presentiments if our existences did not touch at the heart ?
you love me , my beautiful queen , and you will weep for me ? "
" oh , my god , my god ! " cried anne of austria , " this is more than i can bear .
in the name of heaven , duke , leave me , go ! i do not know whether i love you or love you not ; but what i know is that i will not be perjured .
take pity on me , then , and go !
oh , if you are struck in france , if you die in france , if i could imagine that your love for me was the cause of your death , i could not console myself ; i should run mad .
depart then , depart , i implore you ! "
" oh , how beautiful you are thus !
oh , how i love you ! " said buckingham .
" go , go , i implore you , and return hereafter ! come back as ambassador , come back as minister , come back surrounded with guards who will defend you , with servants who will watch over you , and then i shall no longer fear for your days , and i shall be happy in seeing you . "
" oh , is this true what you say ? "
" yes . "
" oh , then , some pledge of your indulgence , some object which came from you , and may remind me that i have not been dreaming ; something you have worn , and that i may wear in my turn -- a ring , a necklace , a chain . "
" will you depart -- will you depart , if i give you that you demand ? "
" yes . "
" this very instant ? "
" yes . "
" you will leave france , you will return to england ? "
" i will , i swear to you . "
" wait , then , wait . "
anne of austria re - entered her apartment , and came out again almost immediately , holding a rosewood casket in her hand , with her cipher encrusted with gold .
" here , my lord , here , " said she , " keep this in memory of me . "
buckingham took the casket , and fell a second time on his knees .
" you have promised me to go , " said the queen .
" and i keep my word .
your hand , madame , your hand , and i depart ! "
anne of austria stretched forth her hand , closing her eyes , and leaning with the other upon estafania , for she felt that her strength was about to fail her .
buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand , and then rising , said , " within six months , if i am not dead , i shall have seen you again , madame -- even if i have to overturn the world . "
and faithful to the promise he had made , he rushed out of the apartment .
in the corridor he met mme . bonacieux , who waited for him , and who , with the same precautions and the same good luck , conducted him out of the louvre .
13 monsieur bonacieux
there was in all this , as may have been observed , one personage concerned , of whom , notwithstanding his precarious position , we have appeared to take but very little notice . this personage was m. bonacieux , the respectable martyr of the political and amorous intrigues which entangled themselves so nicely together at this gallant and chivalric period .
the officers who arrested him conducted him straight to the bastille , where he passed trembling before a party of soldiers who were loading their muskets .
thence , introduced into a half - subterranean gallery , he became , on the part of those who had brought him , the object of the grossest insults and the harshest treatment .
the officers perceived that they had not to deal with a gentleman , and they treated him like a very peasant .
at the end of half an hour or thereabouts , a clerk came to put an end to his tortures , but not to his anxiety , by giving the order to conduct m. bonacieux to the chamber of examination .
ordinarily , prisoners were interrogated in their cells ; but they did not do so with m. bonacieux .
two guards attended the mercer who made him traverse a court and enter a corridor in which were three sentinels , opened a door and pushed him unceremoniously into a low room , where the only furniture was a table , a chair , and a commissary .
the commissary was seated in the chair , and was writing at the table .
the two guards led the prisoner toward the table , and upon a sign from the commissary drew back so far as to be unable to hear anything .
the commissary , who had till this time held his head down over his papers , looked up to see what sort of person he had to do with .
this commissary was a man of very repulsive mien , with a pointed nose , with yellow and salient cheek bones , with eyes small but keen and penetrating , and an expression of countenance resembling at once the polecat and the fox .
his head , supported by a long and flexible neck , issued from his large black robe , balancing itself with a motion very much like that of the tortoise thrusting his head out of his shell .
he began by asking m. bonacieux his name , age , condition , and abode .
the accused replied that his name was jacques michel bonacieux , that he was fifty - one years old , a retired mercer , and lived rue des fossoyeurs , no . 14 .
the commissary then , instead of continuing to interrogate him , made him a long speech upon the danger there is for an obscure citizen to meddle with public matters .
he complicated this exordium by an exposition in which he painted the power and the deeds of the cardinal , that incomparable minister , that conqueror of past ministers , that example for ministers to come -- deeds and power which none could thwart with impunity .
after this second part of his discourse , fixing his hawk s eye upon poor bonacieux , he bade him reflect upon the gravity of his situation .
the reflections of the mercer were already made ; he cursed the instant when m. laporte formed the idea of marrying him to his goddaughter , and particularly the moment when that goddaughter had been received as lady of the linen to her majesty .
at bottom the character of m. bonacieux was one of profound selfishness mixed with sordid avarice , the whole seasoned with extreme cowardice .
the love with which his young wife had inspired him was a secondary sentiment , and was not strong enough to contend with the primitive feelings we have just enumerated .
bonacieux indeed reflected on what had just been said to him .
" but , monsieur commissary , " said he , calmly , " believe that i know and appreciate , more than anybody , the merit of the incomparable eminence by whom we have the honor to be governed . "
" indeed ? " asked the commissary , with an air of doubt . " if that is really so , how came you in the bastille ? "
" how i came there , or rather why i am there , " replied bonacieux , " that is entirely impossible for me to tell you , because i do nt know myself ; but to a certainty it is not for having , knowingly at least , disobliged monsieur the cardinal . "
" you must , nevertheless , have committed a crime , since you are here and are accused of high treason . "
" of high treason ! " cried bonacieux , terrified ; " of high treason ! how is it possible for a poor mercer , who detests huguenots and who abhors spaniards , to be accused of high treason ?
consider , monsieur , the thing is absolutely impossible . "
" monsieur bonacieux , " said the commissary , looking at the accused as if his little eyes had the faculty of reading to the very depths of hearts , " you have a wife ? "
" yes , monsieur , " replied the mercer , in a tremble , feeling that it was at this point affairs were likely to become perplexing ; " that is to say , i had one . "
" what , you  had one  ? what have you done with her , then , if you have her no longer ? "
" they have abducted her , monsieur . "
" they have abducted her ?
" they have abducted her , " added the commissary ; " and do you know the man who has committed this deed ? "
" i think i know him . "
" who is he ? "
" remember that i affirm nothing , monsieur the commissary , and that i only suspect . "
" whom do you suspect ?
come , answer freely . "
m bonacieux was in the greatest perplexity possible . had he better deny everything or tell everything ?
he decided , then , to tell all .
" i suspect , " said he , " a tall , dark man , of lofty carriage , who has the air of a great lord . he has followed us several times , as i think , when i have waited for my wife at the wicket of the louvre to escort her home . "
the commissary now appeared to experience a little uneasiness .
" and his name ? " said he .
" oh , as to his name , i know nothing about it ; but if i were ever to meet him , i should recognize him in an instant , i will answer for it , were he among a thousand persons . "
the face of the commissary grew still darker .
" you should recognize him among a thousand , say you ? " continued he .
" that is to say , " cried bonacieux , who saw he had taken a false step , " that is to say-- "
" you have answered that you should recognize him , " said the commissary . " that is all very well , and enough for today ; before we proceed further , someone must be informed that you know the ravisher of your wife . "
" but i have not told you that i know him ! " cried bonacieux , in despair .
" i told you , on the contrary-- "
" take away the prisoner , " said the commissary to the two guards .
" where must we place him ? " demanded the chief .
" in a dungeon . "
" which ? " " good lord !
in the first one handy , provided it is safe , " said the commissary , with an indifference which penetrated poor bonacieux with horror .
she must have spoken ; she must have confessed everything -- a woman is so weak ! a dungeon !
the first he comes to ! that s it !
bonacieux could not close his eyes ; not because his dungeon was so very disagreeable , but because his uneasiness was so great .
he sat all night on his stool , starting at the least noise ; and when the first rays of the sun penetrated into his chamber , the dawn itself appeared to him to have taken funereal tints .
all at once he heard his bolts drawn , and made a terrified bound .
he believed they were come to conduct him to the scaffold ; so that when he saw merely and simply , instead of the executioner he expected , only his commissary of the preceding evening , attended by his clerk , he was ready to embrace them both .
" your affair has become more complicated since yesterday evening , my good man , and i advise you to tell the whole truth ; for your repentance alone can remove the anger of the cardinal . "
" why , i am ready to tell everything , " cried bonacieux , " at least , all that i know .
interrogate me , i entreat you ! "
" where is your wife , in the first place ? "
" why , did not i tell you she had been stolen from me ? "
" yes , but yesterday at five oclock in the afternoon , thanks to you , she escaped . "
" my wife escaped ! " cried bonacieux .
" oh , unfortunate creature ! monsieur , if she has escaped , it is not my fault , i swear . "
" what business had you , then , to go into the chamber of monsieur dartagnan , your neighbor , with whom you had a long conference during the day ? "
" ah , yes , monsieur commissary ; yes , that is true , and i confess that i was in the wrong .
i did go to monsieur dartagnan s . "
" what was the aim of that visit ? "
" to beg him to assist me in finding my wife .
i believed i had a right to endeavor to find her . i was deceived , as it appears , and i ask your pardon . "
" and what did monsieur dartagnan reply ? "
" monsieur dartagnan promised me his assistance ; but i soon found out that he was betraying me . "
" you impose upon justice .
" fortunately , monsieur dartagnan is in our hands , and you shall be confronted with him . "
" by my faith , i ask no better , " cried bonacieux ; " i shall not be sorry to see the face of an acquaintance . "
" bring in the monsieur dartagnan , " said the commissary to the guards .
the two guards led in athos .
" monsieur dartagnan , " said the commissary , addressing athos , " declare all that passed yesterday between you and monsieur . "
" but , " cried bonacieux , " this is not monsieur dartagnan whom you show me . "
" what ! not monsieur dartagnan ? " exclaimed the commissary .
" not the least in the world , " replied bonacieux .
" what is this gentleman s name ? " asked the commissary .
" i can not tell you ; i do nt know him . "
" how ! you do nt know him ? "
" no . "
" did you never see him ? "
" yes , i have seen him , but i do nt know what he calls himself . "
" your name ? " replied the commissary .
" athos , " replied the musketeer .
" but that is not a man s name ; that is the name of a mountain , " cried the poor questioner , who began to lose his head .
" that is my name , " said athos , quietly .
" but you said that your name was dartagnan . "
" who , i ? "
" yes , you . "
i answered ,  you think so ? 
my guards exclaimed that they were sure of it .
" monsieur , you insult the majesty of justice . "
" not at all , " said athos , calmly .
" you are monsieur dartagnan . "
" you see , monsieur , that you say it again . "
" but i tell you , monsieur commissary , " cried bonacieux , in his turn , " there is not the least doubt about the matter .
monsieur dartagnan is my tenant , although he does not pay me my rent -- and even better on that account ought i to know him .
monsieur dartagnan is a young man , scarcely nineteen or twenty , and this gentleman must be thirty at least .
look at his uniform , monsieur commissary , look at his uniform ! "
" oh , unhappy woman ! " cried the commissary . " how ?
what do you say ? of whom do you speak ?
it is not of my wife , i hope ! "
" on the contrary , it is of her .
yours is a pretty business . "
" because that which she does is part of a plan concerted between you -- of an infernal plan . "
" i swear to you , monsieur commissary , that you are in the profoundest error , that i know nothing in the world about what my wife had to do , that i am entirely a stranger to what she has done ; and that if she has committed any follies , i renounce her , i abjure her , i curse her ! "
" bah ! " said athos to the commissary , " if you have no more need of me , send me somewhere . your monsieur bonacieux is very tiresome . "
" and yet , " said athos , with his habitual calmness , " if it be monsieur dartagnan who is concerned in this matter , i do not perceive how i can take his place . "
" do as i bade you , " cried the commissary , " and preserve absolute secrecy .
you understand ! "
athos shrugged his shoulders , and followed his guards silently , while m. bonacieux uttered lamentations enough to break the heart of a tiger .
they locked the mercer in the same dungeon where he had passed the night , and left him to himself during the day .
bonacieux wept all day , like a true mercer , not being at all a military man , as he himself informed us .
in the evening , about nine oclock , at the moment he had made up his mind to go to bed , he heard steps in his corridor .
these steps drew near to his dungeon , the door was thrown open , and the guards appeared .
" follow me , " said an officer , who came up behind the guards .
" follow you ! " cried bonacieux , " follow you at this hour ! where , my god ? "
" where we have orders to lead you . "
" but that is not an answer . "
" it is , nevertheless , the only one we can give . "
" ah , my god , my god ! " murmured the poor mercer , " now , indeed , i am lost ! "
and he followed the guards who came for him , mechanically and without resistance .
he passed along the same corridor as before , crossed one court , then a second side of a building ; at length , at the gate of the entrance court he found a carriage surrounded by four guards on horseback .
they made him enter this carriage , the officer placed himself by his side , the door was locked , and they were left in a rolling prison .
the carriage was put in motion as slowly as a funeral car .
through the closely fastened windows the prisoner could perceive the houses and the pavement , that was all ; but , true parisian as he was , bonacieux could recognize every street by the milestones , the signs , and the lamps .
at the moment of arriving at st . paul -- the spot where such as were condemned at the bastille were executed -- he was near fainting and crossed himself twice .
he thought the carriage was about to stop there .
the carriage , however , passed on .
farther on , a still greater terror seized him on passing by the cemetery of st . jean , where state criminals were buried .
one thing , however , reassured him ; he remembered that before they were buried their heads were generally cut off , and he felt that his head was still on his shoulders .
this measure somewhat reassured bonacieux . if they meant to execute him at la greve , it could scarcely be worth while to gag him , as they had nearly reached the place of execution .
indeed , the carriage crossed the fatal spot without stopping .
there remained , then , no other place to fear but the traitor s cross ; the carriage was taking the direct road to it .
this time there was no longer any doubt ; it was at the traitor s cross that lesser criminals were executed .
bonacieux had flattered himself in believing himself worthy of st . paul or of the place de greve ; it was at the traitor s cross that his journey and his destiny were about to end !
he could not yet see that dreadful cross , but he felt somehow as if it were coming to meet him .
when he was within twenty paces of it , he heard a noise of people and the carriage stopped .
this was more than poor bonacieux could endure , depressed as he was by the successive emotions which he had experienced ; he uttered a feeble groan which night have been taken for the last sigh of a dying man , and fainted .
14 the man of meung
the crowd was caused , not by the expectation of a man to be hanged , but by the contemplation of a man who was hanged .
the carriage , which had been stopped for a minute , resumed its way , passed through the crowd , threaded the rue st . honore , turned into the rue des bons enfants , and stopped before a low door .
the door opened ; two guards received bonacieux in their arms from the officer who supported him . they carried him through an alley , up a flight of stairs , and deposited him in an antechamber .
all these movements had been effected mechanically , as far as he was concerned .
he had walked as one walks in a dream ; he had a glimpse of objects as through a fog . his ears had perceived sounds without comprehending them ; he might have been executed at that moment without his making a single gesture in his own defense or uttering a cry to implore mercy .
he remained on the bench , with his back leaning against the wall and his hands hanging down , exactly on the spot where the guards placed him .
on looking around him , however , as he could perceive no threatening object , as nothing indicated that he ran any real danger , as the bench was comfortably covered with a well - stuffed cushion , as the wall was ornamented with a beautiful cordova leather , and as large red damask curtains , fastened back by gold clasps , floated before the window , he perceived by degrees that his fear was exaggerated , and he began to turn his head to the right and the left , upward and downward .
at this movement , which nobody opposed , he resumed a little courage , and ventured to draw up one leg and then the other . at length , with the help of his two hands he lifted himself from the bench , and found himself on his feet .
at this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door , continued to exchange some words with a person in the next chamber and then came up to the prisoner .
" is your name bonacieux ? " said he .
" yes , monsieur officer , " stammered the mercer , more dead than alive , " at your service . "
" come in , " said the officer .
and he moved out of the way to let the mercer pass .
the latter obeyed without reply , and entered the chamber , where he appeared to be expected .
it was a large cabinet , close and stifling , with the walls furnished with arms offensive and defensive , and in which there was already a fire , although it was scarcely the end of the month of september .
a square table , covered with books and papers , upon which was unrolled an immense plan of the city of la rochelle , occupied the center of the room .
although this man was scarcely thirty - six or thirty - seven years of age , hair , mustaches , and royal , all began to be gray .
this man , except a sword , had all the appearance of a soldier ; and his buff boots still slightly covered with dust , indicated that he had been on horseback in the course of the day .
this man was armand jean duplessis , cardinal de richelieu ; not such as he is now represented -- broken down like an old man , suffering like a martyr , his body bent , his voice failing , buried in a large armchair as in an anticipated tomb ; no longer living but by the strength of his genius , and no longer maintaining the struggle with europe but by the eternal application of his thoughts -- but such as he really was at this period ; that is to say , an active and gallant cavalier , already weak of body , but sustained by that moral power which made of him one of the most extraordinary men that ever lived , preparing , after having supported the duc de nevers in his duchy of mantua , after having taken nimes , castres , and uzes , to drive the english from the isle of re and lay siege to la rochelle .
at first sight , nothing denoted the cardinal ; and it was impossible for those who did not know his face to guess in whose presence they were .
the poor mercer remained standing at the door , while the eyes of the personage we have just described were fixed upon him , and appeared to wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past .
" is this that bonacieux ? " asked he , after a moment of silence .
" yes , monseigneur , " replied the officer .
" that s well . give me those papers , and leave us . "
the officer took from the table the papers pointed out , gave them to him who asked for them , bowed to the ground , and retired .
bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of the bastille .
from time to time the man by the chimney raised his eyes from the writings , and plunged them like poniards into the heart of the poor mercer .
at the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of examination , the cardinal was satisfied .
" that head has never conspired , " murmured he , " but it matters not ; we will see . "
" you are accused of high treason , " said the cardinal , slowly .
" so i have been told already , monseigneur , " cried bonacieux , giving his interrogator the title he had heard the officer give him , " but i swear to you that i know nothing about it . "
the cardinal repressed a smile .
" you have conspired with your wife , with madame de chevreuse , and with my lord duke of buckingham . "
" indeed , monseigneur , " responded the mercer , " i have heard her pronounce all those names . "
" and on what occasion ? "
" she said that the cardinal de richelieu had drawn the duke of buckingham to paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen . "
" she said that ? " cried the cardinal , with violence .
" yes , monseigneur , but i told her she was wrong to talk about such things ; and that his eminence was incapable-- " " hold your tongue !
you are stupid , " replied the cardinal .
" that s exactly what my wife said , monseigneur . "
" do you know who carried off your wife ? "
" no , monseigneur . "
" you have suspicions , nevertheless ? "
" yes , monseigneur ; but these suspicions appeared to be disagreeable to monsieur the commissary , and i no longer have them . "
" your wife has escaped . did you know that ? "
" no , monseigneur . i learned it since i have been in prison , and that from the conversation of monsieur the commissary -- an amiable man . "
the cardinal repressed another smile .
" then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since her flight . "
" absolutely , monseigneur ; but she has most likely returned to the louvre . "
" at one oclock this morning she had not returned . "
" my god ! what can have become of her , then ? "
" we shall know , be assured . nothing is concealed from the cardinal ; the cardinal knows everything . "
" in that case , monseigneur , do you believe the cardinal will be so kind as to tell me what has become of my wife ? "
" perhaps he may ; but you must , in the first place , reveal to the cardinal all you know of your wife s relations with madame de chevreuse . "
" but , monseigneur , i know nothing about them ; i have never seen her . "
" when you went to fetch your wife from the louvre , did you always return directly home ? "
" scarcely ever ; she had business to transact with linen drapers , to whose houses i conducted her . "
" and how many were there of these linen drapers ? "
" two , monseigneur . "
" and where did they live ? "
" one in rue de vaugirard , the other rue de la harpe . "
" did you go into these houses with her ? "
" never , monseigneur ; i waited at the door . "
" and what excuse did she give you for entering all alone ? "
" she gave me none ; she told me to wait , and i waited . "
" you are a very complacent husband , my dear monsieur bonacieux , " said the cardinal .
" he calls me his dear monsieur , " said the mercer to himself . " peste !
matters are going all right . "
" should you know those doors again ? "
" yes . "
" do you know the numbers ? "
" what are they ? "
" no . 25 in the rue de vaugirard ; 75 in the rue de la harpe . "
" that s well , " said the cardinal .
at these words he took up a silver bell , and rang it ; the officer entered .
" let him come in , then ! " said the cardinal , quickly .
the officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity which all the servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him .
" to your eminence ! " murmured bonacieux , rolling his eyes round in astonishment .
five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the officer , when the door opened , and a new personage entered .
" it is he ! " cried bonacieux . " he !
what he ? " asked the cardinal .
" the man who abducted my wife . "
the cardinal rang a second time .
the officer reappeared .
" place this man in the care of his guards again , and let him wait till i send for him . "
" no , monseigneur , no , it is not he ! " cried bonacieux ; " no , i was deceived . this is quite another man , and does not resemble him at all . monsieur is , i am sure , an honest man . "
" take away that fool ! " said the cardinal .
the officer took bonacieux by the arm , and led him into the antechamber , where he found his two guards .
the newly introduced personage followed bonacieux impatiently with his eyes till he had gone out ; and the moment the door closed , " they have seen each other ; " said he , approaching the cardinal eagerly .
" who ? " asked his eminence .
" he and she . "
" the queen and the duke ? " cried richelieu .
" yes . "
" where ? "
" at the louvre . "
" are you sure of it ? "
" perfectly sure . "
" who told you of it ? "
" madame de lannoy , who is devoted to your eminence , as you know . "
" why did she not let me know sooner ? "
" whether by chance or mistrust , the queen made madame de surgis sleep in her chamber , and detained her all day . "
" well , we are beaten !
now let us try to take our revenge . "
" i will assist you with all my heart , monseigneur ; be assured of that . "
" how did it come about ? "
" at half past twelve the queen was with her women-- "
" where ? "
" in her bedchamber-- "
" go on . "
" when someone came and brought her a handkerchief from her laundress . "
" and then ? "
" the queen immediately exhibited strong emotion ; and despite the rouge with which her face was covered evidently turned pale-- "
" and then , and then ? "
" she then arose , and with altered voice ,  ladies ,  said she ,  wait for me ten minutes , i shall soon return . 
she then opened the door of her alcove , and went out . "
" why did not madame de lannoy come and inform you instantly ? "
" nothing was certain ; besides , her majesty had said ,  ladies , wait for me ,  and she did not dare to disobey the queen . "
" how long did the queen remain out of the chamber ? "
" three - quarters of an hour . "
" none of her women accompanied her ? "
" only donna estafania . "
" did she afterward return ? "
" yes ; but only to take a little rosewood casket , with her cipher upon it , and went out again immediately . "
" and when she finally returned , did she bring that casket with her ? "
" no . "
" does madame de lannoy know what was in that casket ? "
" yes ; the diamond studs which his majesty gave the queen . "
" and she came back without this casket ? "
" yes . "
" madame de lannoy , then , is of opinion that she gave them to buckingham ? "
" she is sure of it . "
" how can she be so ? "
" in the course of the day madame de lannoy , in her quality of tire - woman of the queen , looked for this casket , appeared uneasy at not finding it , and at length asked information of the queen . "
" and then the queen ? "
" the queen became exceedingly red , and replied that having in the evening broken one of those studs , she had sent it to her goldsmith to be repaired . "
" he must be called upon , and so ascertain if the thing be true or not . "
" i have just been with him . "
" and the goldsmith ? "
" the goldsmith has heard nothing of it . "
" well , well ! rochefort , all is not lost ; and perhaps -- perhaps everything is for the best . "
" the fact is that i do not doubt your eminence s genius-- "
" will repair the blunders of his agent -- is that it ? "
" that is exactly what i was going to say , if your eminence had let me finish my sentence . "
" meanwhile , do you know where the duchesse de chevreuse and the duke of buckingham are now concealed ? "
" no , monseigneur ; my people could tell me nothing on that head . "
" but i know . "
" you , monseigneur ? "
" yes ; or at least i guess .
they were , one in the rue de vaugirard , no . 25 ; the other in the rue de la harpe , no . 75 . "
" does your eminence command that they both be instantly arrested ? "
" it will be too late ; they will be gone . "
" but still , we can make sure that they are so . "
" take ten men of my guardsmen , and search the two houses thoroughly . "
" instantly , monseigneur . "
and rochefort went hastily out of the apartment .
the cardinal being left alone , reflected for an instant and then rang the bell a third time .
the same officer appeared .
" bring the prisoner in again , " said the cardinal .
m bonacieux was introduced afresh , and upon a sign from the cardinal , the officer retired .
" you have deceived me ! " said the cardinal , sternly .
" i , " cried bonacieux , " i deceive your eminence ! "
" your wife , in going to rue de vaugirard and rue de la harpe , did not go to find linen drapers . "
" then why did she go , just god ? "
" she went to meet the duchesse de chevreuse and the duke of buckingham . "
" yes , " cried bonacieux , recalling all his remembrances of the circumstances , " yes , that s it .
" the cardinal has touched me with his hand !
i have touched the hand of the great man ! " cried bonacieux . " the great man has called me his friend ! "
" yes , my friend , yes , " said the cardinal , with that paternal tone which he sometimes knew how to assume , but which deceived none who knew him ; " and as you have been unjustly suspected , well , you must be indemnified . here , take this purse of a hundred pistoles , and pardon me . "
" i pardon you , monseigneur ! " said bonacieux , hesitating to take the purse , fearing , doubtless , that this pretended gift was but a pleasantry . " but you are able to have me arrested , you are able to have me tortured , you are able to have me hanged ; you are the master , and i could not have the least word to say .
pardon you , monseigneur !
you can not mean that ! "
" ah , my dear monsieur bonacieux , you are generous in this matter . i see it and i thank you for it .
thus , then , you will take this bag , and you will go away without being too malcontent . "
" i go away enchanted . "
" farewell , then , or rather , au revoir ! "
the cardinal listened with a smile to this vociferous manifestation of the feelings of m. bonacieux ; and then , when bonacieux s cries were no longer audible , " good ! " said he , " that man would henceforward lay down his life for me . "
and the cardinal began to examine with the greatest attention the map of la rochelle , which , as we have said , lay open on the desk , tracing with a pencil the line in which the famous dyke was to pass which , eighteen months later , shut up the port of the besieged city .
as he was in the deepest of his strategic meditations , the door opened , and rochefort returned .
" well ? " said the cardinal , eagerly , rising with a promptitude which proved the degree of importance he attached to the commission with which he had charged the count .
" it was they ! " cried the cardinal , looking at the clock ; " and now it is too late to have them pursued . the duchess is at tours , and the duke at boulogne .
it is in london they must be found . "
" what are your eminence s orders ? "
" not a word of what has passed . let the queen remain in perfect security ; let her be ignorant that we know her secret . let her believe that we are in search of some conspiracy or other .
send me the keeper of the seals , seguier . "
" and that man , what has your eminence done with him ? "
" what man ? " asked the cardinal .
" that bonacieux . "
" i have done with him all that could be done . i have made him a spy upon his wife . "
the comte de rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges the superiority of the master as great , and retired .
left alone , the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter , which he secured with his special seal . then he rang .
the officer entered for the fourth time .
" tell vitray to come to me , " said he , " and tell him to get ready for a journey . "
an instant after , the man he asked for was before him , booted and spurred .
" vitray , " said he , " you will go with all speed to london .
you must not stop an instant on the way . you will deliver this letter to milady .
here is an order for two hundred pistoles ; call upon my treasurer and get the money .
you shall have as much again if you are back within six days , and have executed your commission well . "
the messenger , without replying a single word , bowed , took the letter , with the order for the two hundred pistoles , and retired .
here is what the letter contained :
milady , be at the first ball at which the duke of buckingham shall be present .
he will wear on his doublet twelve diamond studs ; get as near to him as you can , and cut off two .
as soon as these studs shall be in your possession , inform me .
15 men of the robe and men of the sword
on the day after these events had taken place , athos not having reappeared , m. de treville was informed by dartagnan and porthos of the circumstance .
as to aramis , he had asked for leave of absence for five days , and was gone , it was said , to rouen on family business .
m de treville was the father of his soldiers .
the lowest or the least known of them , as soon as he assumed the uniform of the company , was as sure of his aid and support as if he had been his own brother .
he repaired , then , instantly to the office of the lieutenant - criminel .
the officer who commanded the post of the red cross was sent for , and by successive inquiries they learned that athos was then lodged in the fort leveque .
athos had passed through all the examinations we have seen bonacieux undergo .
we were present at the scene in which the two captives were confronted with each other .
athos , who had till that time said nothing for fear that dartagnan , interrupted in his turn , should not have the time necessary , from this moment declared that his name was athos , and not dartagnan .
the second commissary was as much bewildered as the first had been by the simple and firm declaration of the musketeer , upon whom he was anxious to take the revenge which men of the robe like at all times to gain over men of the sword ; but the name of m. de treville , and that of m. de la tremouille , commanded a little reflection .
athos was then sent to the cardinal ; but unfortunately the cardinal was at the louvre with the king .
it was precisely at this moment that m. de treville , on leaving the residence of the lieutenant - criminel and the governor of the fort leveque without being able to find athos , arrived at the palace .
as captain of the musketeers , m. de treville had the right of entry at all times .
it is well known how violent the king s prejudices were against the queen , and how carefully these prejudices were kept up by the cardinal , who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitely more than men .
one of the grand causes of this prejudice was the friendship of anne of austria for mme . de chevreuse .
these two women gave him more uneasiness than the war with spain , the quarrel with england , or the embarrassment of the finances .
in his eyes and to his conviction , mme . de chevreuse not only served the queen in her political intrigues , but , what tormented him still more , in her amorous intrigues .
capricious and unfaithful , the king wished to be called louis the just and louis the chaste .
posterity will find a difficulty in understanding this character , which history explains only by facts and never by reason .
and yet , in all this , the cardinal had not yet said a word about the duke of buckingham .
at this instant m. de treville entered , cool , polite , and in irreproachable costume .
informed of what had passed by the presence of the cardinal and the alteration in the king s countenance , m. de treville felt himself something like samson before the philistines .
louis xiii had already placed his hand on the knob of the door ; at the noise of m. de treville s entrance he turned round .
" you arrive in good time , monsieur , " said the king , who , when his passions were raised to a certain point , could not dissemble ; " i have learned some fine things concerning your musketeers . "
" and i , " said treville , coldly , " i have some pretty things to tell your majesty concerning these gownsmen . "
" what ? " said the king , with hauteur .
" i have the honor to inform your majesty , " continued m. de treville , in the same tone , " that a party of procureurs , commissaries , and men of the police -- very estimable people , but very inveterate , as it appears , against the uniform -- have taken upon themselves to arrest in a house , to lead away through the open street , and throw into the fort leveque , all upon an order which they have refused to show me , one of my , or rather your musketeers , sire , of irreproachable conduct , of an almost illustrious reputation , and whom your majesty knows favorably , monsieur athos . "
" athos , " said the king , mechanically ; " yes , certainly i know that name . "
addressing the cardinal , " monsieur de cahusac is quite recovered , is he not ? "
the cardinal made the king a sign , which signified , " that was on account of the affair about which i spoke to you . "
" we all know that , " interrupted the king ; " for all that was done for our service . "
" then , " said treville , " it was also for your majesty s service that one of my musketeers , who was innocent , has been seized , that he has been placed between two guards like a malefactor , and that this gallant man , who has ten times shed his blood in your majesty s service and is ready to shed it again , has been paraded through the midst of an insolent populace ? "
" bah ! " said the king , who began to be shaken , " was it so managed ? "
" monsieur de treville , " said the cardinal , with the greatest phlegm , " does not tell your majesty that this innocent musketeer , this gallant man , had only an hour before attacked , sword in hand , four commissaries of inquiry , who were delegated by myself to examine into an affair of the highest importance . "
" i defy your eminence to prove it , " cried treville , with his gascon freedom and military frankness ; " for one hour before , monsieur athos , who , i will confide it to your majesty , is really a man of the highest quality , did me the honor after having dined with me to be conversing in the saloon of my hotel , with the duc de la tremouille and the comte de chalus , who happened to be there . "
the king looked at the cardinal .
" a written examination attests it , " said the cardinal , replying aloud to the mute interrogation of his majesty ; " and the ill - treated people have drawn up the following , which i have the honor to present to your majesty . "
" come , come , treville , hold your tongue , " said the king .
" if his eminence entertains any suspicion against one of my musketeers , " said treville , " the justice of monsieur the cardinal is so well known that i demand an inquiry . "
" in the house in which the judicial inquiry was made , " continued the impassive cardinal , " there lodges , i believe , a young bearnais , a friend of the musketeer . "
" your eminence means monsieur dartagnan . "
" i mean a young man whom you patronize , monsieur de treville . "
" yes , your eminence , it is the same . "
" do you not suspect this young man of having given bad counsel ? "
besides , dartagnan passed the evening with me . "
" well , " said the cardinal , " everybody seems to have passed the evening with you . "
" does your eminence doubt my word ? " said treville , with a brow flushed with anger .
" no , god forbid , " said the cardinal ; " only , at what hour was he with you ? "
" oh , as to that i can speak positively , your eminence ; for as he came in i remarked that it was but half past nine by the clock , although i had believed it to be later . "
" at what hour did he leave your hotel ? "
" at half past ten -- an hour after the event . "
" well , " replied the cardinal , who could not for an instant suspect the loyalty of treville , and who felt that the victory was escaping him , " well , but athos was taken in the house in the rue des fossoyeurs . "
" is one friend forbidden to visit another , or a musketeer of my company to fraternize with a guard of dessessart s company ? "
" yes , when the house where he fraternizes is suspected . "
" that house is suspected , treville , " said the king ; " perhaps you did not know it ? "
" indeed , sire , i did not .
the house may be suspected ; but i deny that it is so in the part of it inhabited my monsieur dartagnan , for i can affirm , sire , if i can believe what he says , that there does not exist a more devoted servant of your majesty , or a more profound admirer of monsieur the cardinal . "
" was it not this dartagnan who wounded jussac one day , in that unfortunate encounter which took place near the convent of the carmes - dechausses ? " asked the king , looking at the cardinal , who colored with vexation .
" and the next day , bernajoux .
yes , sire , yes , it is the same ; and your majesty has a good memory . "
" come , how shall we decide ? " said the king .
" that concerns your majesty more than me , " said the cardinal . " i should affirm the culpability . "
" and i deny it , " said treville . " but his majesty has judges , and these judges will decide . "
" that is best , " said the king . " send the case before the judges ; it is their business to judge , and they shall judge . "
" only , " replied treville , " it is a sad thing that in the unfortunate times in which we live , the purest life , the most incontestable virtue , can not exempt a man from infamy and persecution .
the army , i will answer for it , will be but little pleased at being exposed to rigorous treatment on account of police affairs . "
the expression was imprudent ; but m. de treville launched it with knowledge of his cause .
he was desirous of an explosion , because in that case the mine throws forth fire , and fire enlightens .
" police affairs ! " cried the king , taking up treville s words , " police affairs ! and what do you know about them , monsieur ?
meddle with your musketeers , and do not annoy me in this way .
it appears , according to your account , that if by mischance a musketeer is arrested , france is in danger .
what a noise about a musketeer ! i would arrest ten of them , ventrebleu , a hundred , even , all the company , and i would not allow a whisper . "
" from the moment they are suspected by your majesty , " said treville , " the musketeers are guilty ; therefore , you see me prepared to surrender my sword -- for after having accused my soldiers , there can be no doubt that monsieur the cardinal will end by accusing me . it is best to constitute myself at once a prisoner with athos , who is already arrested , and with dartagnan , who most probably will be . "
" gascon - headed man , will you have done ? " said the king .
" sire , " replied treville , without lowering his voice in the least , " either order my musketeer to be restored to me , or let him be tried . "
" he shall be tried , " said the cardinal .
" well , so much the better ; for in that case i shall demand of his majesty permission to plead for him . "
the king feared an outbreak .
" if his eminence , " said he , " did not have personal motives-- "
the cardinal saw what the king was about to say and interrupted him : " pardon me , " said he ; " but the instant your majesty considers me a prejudiced judge , i withdraw . "
" come , " said the king , " will you swear , by my father , that athos was at your residence during the event and that he took no part in it ? "
" by your glorious father , and by yourself , whom i love and venerate above all the world , i swear it . "
" be so kind as to reflect , sire , " said the cardinal . " if we release the prisoner thus , we shall never know the truth . "
" athos may always be found , " replied treville , " ready to answer , when it shall please the gownsmen to interrogate him .
he will not desert , monsieur the cardinal , be assured of that ; i will answer for him . "
" no , he will not desert , " said the king ; " he can always be found , as treville says . besides , " added he , lowering his voice and looking with a suppliant air at the cardinal , " let us give them apparent security ; that is policy . "
this policy of louis xiii made richelieu smile .
" order it as you please , sire ; you possess the right of pardon . "
" the right of pardoning only applies to the guilty , " said treville , who was determined to have the last word , " and my musketeer is innocent .
it is not mercy , then , that you are about to accord , sire , it is justice . "
" and he is in the fort leveque ? " said the king .
" yes , sire , in solitary confinement , in a dungeon , like the lowest criminal . "
" the devil ! " murmured the king ; " what must be done ? "
" sign an order for his release , and all will be said , " replied the cardinal . " i believe with your majesty that monsieur de treville s guarantee is more than sufficient . "
treville bowed very respectfully , with a joy that was not unmixed with fear ; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on the part of the cardinal to this sudden yielding .
the king signed the order for release , and treville carried it away without delay .
as he was about to leave the presence , the cardinal gave him a friendly smile , and said , " a perfect harmony reigns , sire , between the leaders and the soldiers of your musketeers , which must be profitable for the service and honorable to all . "
" he will play me some dog s trick or other , and that immediately , " said treville . " one has never the last word with such a man .
but let us be quick -- the king may change his mind in an hour ; and at all events it is more difficult to replace a man in the fort leveque or the bastille who has got out , than to keep a prisoner there who is in . "
m de treville made his entrance triumphantly into the fort leveque , whence he delivered the musketeer , whose peaceful indifference had not for a moment abandoned him .
the first time he saw dartagnan , " you have come off well , " said he to him ; " there is your jussac thrust paid for .
there still remains that of bernajoux , but you must not be too confident . "
as to the rest , m. de treville had good reason to mistrust the cardinal and to think that all was not over , for scarcely had the captain of the musketeers closed the door after him , than his eminence said to the king , " now that we are at length by ourselves , we will , if your majesty pleases , converse seriously . sire , buckingham has been in paris five days , and only left this morning . "
16 in which m. seguier , keeper of the seals , looks more than once for the bell
it is impossible to form an idea of the impression these few words made upon louis xiii . he grew pale and red alternately ; and the cardinal saw at once that he had recovered by a single blow all the ground he had lost .
" buckingham in paris ! " cried he , " and why does he come ? "
" to conspire , no doubt , with your enemies , the huguenots and the spaniards . "
" no , pardieu , no ! to conspire against my honor with madame de chevreuse , madame de longueville , and the condes . "
" oh , sire , what an idea !
the queen is too virtuous ; and besides , loves your majesty too well . "
" woman is weak , monsieur cardinal , " said the king ; " and as to loving me much , i have my own opinion as to that love . "
" i not the less maintain , " said the cardinal , " that the duke of buckingham came to paris for a project wholly political . "
" and i am sure that he came for quite another purpose , monsieur cardinal ; but if the queen be guilty , let her tremble ! "
" indeed , " said the cardinal , " whatever repugnance i may have to directing my mind to such a treason , your majesty compels me to think of it . madame de lannoy , whom , according to your majesty s command , i have frequently interrogated , told me this morning that the night before last her majesty sat up very late , that this morning she wept much , and that she was writing all day . "
" that s it ! " cried the king ; " to him , no doubt . cardinal , i must have the queen s papers . "
" but how to take them , sire ?
it seems to me that it is neither your majesty nor myself who can charge himself with such a mission . "
" how did they act with regard to the marechale dancre ? " cried the king , in the highest state of choler ; " first her closets were thoroughly searched , and then she herself . "
" the marechale dancre was no more than the marechale dancre . a florentine adventurer , sire , and that was all ; while the august spouse of your majesty is anne of austria , queen of france -- that is to say , one of the greatest princesses in the world . "
" she is not the less guilty , monsieur duke !
the more she has forgotten the high position in which she was placed , the more degrading is her fall .
besides , i long ago determined to put an end to all these petty intrigues of policy and love .
she has near her a certain laporte . "
" who , i believe , is the mainspring of all this , i confess , " said the cardinal .
" you think then , as i do , that she deceives me ? " said the king .
" i believe , and i repeat it to your majesty , that the queen conspires against the power of the king , but i have not said against his honor . "
why did you not have him arrested while in paris ? " " arrest the duke !
arrest the prime minister of king charles i !
think of it , sire !
what a scandal ! and if the suspicions of your majesty , which i still continue to doubt , should prove to have any foundation , what a terrible disclosure , what a fearful scandal ! "
" but as he exposed himself like a vagabond or a thief , he should have been-- "
louis xiii stopped , terrified at what he was about to say , while richelieu , stretching out his neck , waited uselessly for the word which had died on the lips of the king .
" he should have been-- ? "
" nothing , " said the king , " nothing .
but all the time he was in paris , you , of course , did not lose sight of him ? "
" no , sire . "
" where did he lodge ? "
" rue de la harpe . no . 75 . "
" where is that ? "
" by the side of the luxembourg . "
" and you are certain that the queen and he did not see each other ? "
" i believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty , sire . "
" but they have corresponded ; it is to him that the queen has been writing all the day . monsieur duke , i must have those letters ! "
" sire , notwithstanding-- "
" monsieur duke , at whatever price it may be , i will have them . "
" i would , however , beg your majesty to observe-- "
" do you , then , also join in betraying me , monsieur cardinal , by thus always opposing my will ? are you also in accord with spain and england , with madame de chevreuse and the queen ? "
" sire , " replied the cardinal , sighing , " i believed myself secure from such a suspicion . "
" monsieur cardinal , you have heard me ; i will have those letters . "
" there is but one way . "
" what is that ? "
" that would be to charge monsieur de seguier , the keeper of the seals , with this mission .
the matter enters completely into the duties of the post . "
" let him be sent for instantly . "
" he is most likely at my hotel . i requested him to call , and when i came to the louvre i left orders if he came , to desire him to wait . "
" let him be sent for instantly . "
" your majesty s orders shall be executed ; but-- "
" but what ? "
" but the queen will perhaps refuse to obey . "
" my orders ? "
" yes , if she is ignorant that these orders come from the king . "
" well , that she may have no doubt on that head , i will go and inform her myself . "
" your majesty will not forget that i have done everything in my power to prevent a rupture . "
" yes , duke , yes , i know you are very indulgent toward the queen , too indulgent , perhaps ; we shall have occasion , i warn you , at some future period to speak of that . "
" whenever it shall please your majesty ; but i shall be always happy and proud , sire , to sacrifice myself to the harmony which i desire to see reign between you and the queen of france . "
" very well , cardinal , very well ; but , meantime , send for monsieur the keeper of the seals . i will go to the queen . "
and louis xiii , opening the door of communication , passed into the corridor which led from his apartments to those of anne of austria .
the queen was in the midst of her women -- mme . de guitaut , mme . de sable , mme . de montbazon , and mme . de guemene .
in a corner was the spanish companion , donna estafania , who had followed her from madrid .
mme . guemene was reading aloud , and everybody was listening to her with attention with the exception of the queen , who had , on the contrary , desired this reading in order that she might be able , while feigning to listen , to pursue the thread of her own thoughts .
these thoughts , gilded as they were by a last reflection of love , were not the less sad .
anne of austria , deprived of the confidence of her husband , pursued by the hatred of the cardinal , who could not pardon her for having repulsed a more tender feeling , having before her eyes the example of the queen - mother whom that hatred had tormented all her life -- though marie de medicis , if the memoirs of the time are to be believed , had begun by according to the cardinal that sentiment which anne of austria always refused him -- anne of austria had seen her most devoted servants fall around her , her most intimate confidants , her dearest favorites . like those unfortunate persons endowed with a fatal gift , she brought misfortune upon everything she touched . her friendship was a fatal sign which called down persecution .
mme . de chevreuse and mme . de bernet were exiled , and laporte did not conceal from his mistress that he expected to be arrested every instant .
it was at the moment when she was plunged in the deepest and darkest of these reflections that the door of the chamber opened , and the king entered .
the reader hushed herself instantly . all the ladies rose , and there was a profound silence .
as to the king , he made no demonstration of politeness , only stopping before the queen .
the unfortunate queen , who was constantly threatened with divorce , exile , and trial even , turned pale under her rouge , and could not refrain from saying , " but why this visit , sire ?
what can the chancellor have to say to me that your majesty could not say yourself ? "
the king turned upon his heel without reply , and almost at the same instant the captain of the guards , m. de guitant , announced the visit of the chancellor .
when the chancellor appeared , the king had already gone out by another door .
the chancellor entered , half smiling , half blushing . as we shall probably meet with him again in the course of our history , it may be well for our readers to be made at once acquainted with him .
this chancellor was a pleasant man .
he was des roches le masle , canon of notre dame , who had formerly been valet of a bishop , who introduced him to his eminence as a perfectly devout man .
the cardinal trusted him , and therein found his advantage .
there are many stories related of him , and among them this . after a wild youth , he had retired into a convent , there to expiate , at least for some time , the follies of adolescence .
on entering this holy place , the poor penitent was unable to shut the door so close as to prevent the passions he fled from entering with him .
at the denunciating sound , the monks would be rendered aware that temptation was besieging a brother , and all the community would go to prayers .
this advice appeared good to the future chancellor .
the monks had no longer an instant of repose .
by day they did nothing but ascend and descend the steps which led to the chapel ; at night , in addition to complines and matins , they were further obliged to leap twenty times out of their beds and prostrate themselves on the floor of their cells .
it is not known whether it was the devil who gave way , or the monks who grew tired ; but within three months the penitent reappeared in the world with the reputation of being the most terrible possessed that ever existed .
on leaving the convent he entered into the magistracy , became president on the place of his uncle , embraced the cardinal s party , which did not prove want of sagacity , became chancellor , served his eminence with zeal in his hatred against the queen - mother and his vengeance against anne of austria , stimulated the judges in the affair of calais , encouraged the attempts of m. de laffemas , chief gamekeeper of france ; then , at length , invested with the entire confidence of the cardinal -- a confidence which he had so well earned -- he received the singular commission for the execution of which he presented himself in the queen s apartments .
the queen was still standing when he entered ; but scarcely had she perceived him then she reseated herself in her armchair , and made a sign to her women to resume their cushions and stools , and with an air of supreme hauteur , said , " what do you desire , monsieur , and with what object do you present yourself here ? "
" to make , madame , in the name of the king , and without prejudice to the respect which i have the honor to owe to your majesty a close examination into all your papers . "
" how , monsieur , an investigation of my papers -- mine ! truly , this is an indignity ! "
" be kind enough to pardon me , madame ; but in this circumstance i am but the instrument which the king employs .
has not his majesty just left you , and has he not himself asked you to prepare for this visit ? " " search , then , monsieur !
i am a criminal , as it appears . estafania , give up the keys of my drawers and my desks . "
for form s sake the chancellor paid a visit to the pieces of furniture named ; but he well knew that it was not in a piece of furniture that the queen would place the important letter she had written that day .
when the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawers of the secretaries , it became necessary , whatever hesitation he might experience -- it became necessary , i say , to come to the conclusion of the affair ; that is to say , to search the queen herself .
the chancellor advanced , therefore , toward anne of austria , and said with a very perplexed and embarrassed air , " and now it remains for me to make the principal examination . "
" what is that ? " asked the queen , who did not understand , or rather was not willing to understand .
" his majesty is certain that a letter has been written by you during the day ; he knows that it has not yet been sent to its address .
this letter is not in your table nor in your secretary ; and yet this letter must be somewhere . "
" would you dare to lift your hand to your queen ? " said anne of austria , drawing herself up to her full height , and fixing her eyes upon the chancellor with an expression almost threatening .
" i am a faithful subject of the king , madame , and all that his majesty commands i shall do . "
" well , it is true ! " said anne of austria ; " and the spies of the cardinal have served him faithfully .
i have written a letter today ; that letter is not yet gone .
the letter is here . "
and the queen laid her beautiful hand on her bosom .
" then give me that letter , madame , " said the chancellor .
" i will give it to none but the king monsieur , " said anne .
" if the king had desired that the letter should be given to him , madame , he would have demanded it of you himself .
but i repeat to you , i am charged with reclaiming it ; and if you do not give it up-- "
" well ? "
" he has , then , charged me to take it from you . "
" how ! what do you say ? "
" that my orders go far , madame ; and that i am authorized to seek for the suspected paper , even on the person of your majesty . "
" what horror ! " cried the queen .
" be kind enough , then , madame , to act more compliantly . "
" the conduct is infamously violent ! do you know that , monsieur ? "
" the king commands it , madame ; excuse me . "
" i will not suffer it ! no , no , i would rather die ! " cried the queen , in whom the imperious blood of spain and austria began to rise . the chancellor made a profound reverence .
then , with the intention quite patent of not drawing back a foot from the accomplishment of the commission with which he was charged , and as the attendant of an executioner might have done in the chamber of torture , he approached anne of austria , for whose eyes at the same instant sprang tears of rage .
the queen was , as we have said , of great beauty .
the commission might well be called delicate ; and the king had reached , in his jealousy of buckingham , the point of not being jealous of anyone else .
without doubt the chancellor , seguier looked about at that moment for the rope of the famous bell ; but not finding it he summoned his resolution , and stretched forth his hands toward the place where the queen had acknowledged the paper was to be found .
anne of austria took one step backward , became so pale that it might be said she was dying , and leaning with her left hand upon a table behind her to keep herself from falling , she with her right hand drew the paper from her bosom and held it out to the keeper of the seals .
" there , monsieur , there is that letter ! " cried the queen , with a broken and trembling voice ; " take it , and deliver me from your odious presence . "
the chancellor , who , on his part , trembled with an emotion easily to be conceived , took the letter , bowed to the ground , and retired .
the door was scarcely closed upon him , when the queen sank , half fainting , into the arms of her women .
the chancellor carried the letter to the king without having read a single word of it .
" there , duke , " said he , " you were right and i was wrong .
the whole intrigue is political , and there is not the least question of love in this letter ; but , on the other hand , there is abundant question of you . "
the cardinal took the letter , and read it with the greatest attention ; then , when he had arrived at the end of it , he read it a second time .
" well , your majesty , " said he , " you see how far my enemies go ; they menace you with two wars if you do not dismiss me .
in your place , in truth , sire , i should yield to such powerful instance ; and on my part , it would be a real happiness to withdraw from public affairs . "
" what say you , duke ? "
" i say , sire , that my health is sinking under these excessive struggles and these never - ending labors .
i say that according to all probability i shall not be able to undergo the fatigues of the siege of la rochelle , and that it would be far better that you should appoint there either monsieur de conde , monsieur de bassopierre , or some valiant gentleman whose business is war , and not me , who am a churchman , and who am constantly turned aside for my real vocation to look after matters for which i have no aptitude .
you would be the happier for it at home , sire , and i do not doubt you would be the greater for it abroad . "
" monsieur duke , " said the king , " i understand you . be satisfied , all who are named in that letter shall be punished as they deserve , even the queen herself . "
" what do you say , sire ?
oh , if she betrayed your majesty on the side of your honor , it would be quite another thing , and i should be the first to say ,  no grace , sire -- no grace for the guilty ! 
happily , there is nothing of the kind , and your majesty has just acquired a new proof of it . "
" that is true , monsieur cardinal , " said the king , " and you were right , as you always are ; but the queen , not the less , deserves all my anger . "
" it is you , sire , who have now incurred hers . and even if she were to be seriously offended , i could well understand it ; your majesty has treated her with a severity-- "
" it is thus i will always treat my enemies and yours , duke , however high they may be placed , and whatever peril i may incur in acting severely toward them . "
" the queen is my enemy , but is not yours , sire ; on the contrary , she is a devoted , submissive , and irreproachable wife . allow me , then , sire , to intercede for her with your majesty . "
" let her humble herself , then , and come to me first . "
" on the contrary , sire , set the example . you have committed the first wrong , since it was you who suspected the queen . "
" what ! i make the first advances ? " said the king . " never ! "
" sire , i entreat you to do so . "
" besides , in what manner can i make advances first ? "
" by doing a thing which you know will be agreeable to her . "
" what is that ? "
" give a ball ; you know how much the queen loves dancing . i will answer for it , her resentment will not hold out against such an attention . "
" monsieur cardinal , you know that i do not like worldly pleasures . "
" the queen will only be the more grateful to you , as she knows your antipathy for that amusement ; besides , it will be an opportunity for her to wear those beautiful diamonds which you gave her recently on her birthday and with which she has since had no occasion to adorn herself . "
" sire , " said the cardinal , " leave severity to your ministers . clemency is a royal virtue ; employ it , and you will find that you derive advantage therein . "
thereupon the cardinal , hearing the clock strike eleven , bowed low , asking permission of the king to retire , and supplicating him to come to a good understanding with the queen .
anne of austria , who , in consequence of the seizure of her letter , expected reproaches , was much astonished the next day to see the king make some attempts at reconciliation with her .
her first movement was repellent . her womanly pride and her queenly dignity had both been so cruelly offended that she could not come round at the first advance ; but , overpersuaded by the advice of her women , she at last had the appearance of beginning to forget .
the king took advantage of this favorable moment to tell her that her had the intention of shortly giving a fete .
a fete was so rare a thing for poor anne of austria that at this announcement , as the cardinal had predicted , the last trace of her resentment disappeared , if not from her heart at least from her countenance .
she asked upon what day this fete would take place , but the king replied that he must consult the cardinal upon that head .
indeed , every day the king asked the cardinal when this fete should take place ; and every day the cardinal , under some pretext , deferred fixing it .
on the same day the cardinal received this letter the king put his customary question to him .
richelieu counted on his fingers , and said to himself , " she will arrive , she says , four or five days after having received the money . it will require four or five days for the transmission of the money , four or five days for her to return ; that makes ten days . now , allowing for contrary winds , accidents , and a woman s weakness , there are twelve days . "
" well , monsieur duke , " said the king , " have you made your calculations ? "
" yes , sire . today is the twentieth of september . the aldermen of the city give a fete on the third of october .
then the cardinal added , " a propos , sire , do not forget to tell her majesty the evening before the fete that you should like to see how her diamond studs become her . "
17 bonacieux at home
it was the second time the cardinal had mentioned these diamond studs to the king .
louis xiii was struck with this insistence , and began to fancy that this recommendation concealed some mystery .
more than once the king had been humiliated by the cardinal , whose police , without having yet attained the perfection of the modern police , were excellent , being better informed than himself , even upon what was going on in his own household .
he hoped , then , in a conversation with anne of austria , to obtain some information from that conversation , and afterward to come upon his eminence with some secret which the cardinal either knew or did not know , but which , in either case , would raise him infinitely in the eyes of his minister .
he went then to the queen , and according to custom accosted her with fresh menaces against those who surrounded her .
he arrived at this end by his persistence in accusation .
" but , " cried anne of austria , tired of these vague attacks , " but , sire , you do not tell me all that you have in your heart .
what have i done , then ?
let me know what crime i have committed .
it is impossible that your majesty can make all this ado about a letter written to my brother . "
the king , attacked in a manner so direct , did not know what to answer ; and he thought that this was the moment for expressing the desire which he was not going to have made until the evening before the fete .
" madame , " said he , with dignity , " there will shortly be a ball at the hotel de ville . i wish , in order to honor our worthy aldermen , you should appear in ceremonial costume , and above all , ornamented with the diamond studs which i gave you on your birthday .
that is my answer . "
the answer was terrible .
anne of austria believed that louis xiii knew all , and that the cardinal had persuaded him to employ this long dissimulation of seven or eight days , which , likewise , was characteristic .
she became excessively pale , leaned her beautiful hand upon a console , which hand appeared then like one of wax , and looking at the king with terror in her eyes , she was unable to reply by a single syllable .
" you hear , madame , " said the king , who enjoyed the embarrassment to its full extent , but without guessing the cause . " you hear , madame ? "
" yes , sire , i hear , " stammered the queen .
" you will appear at this ball ? "
" yes . "
" with those studs ? "
" then that is agreed , " said the king , " and that is all i had to say to you . "
" but on what day will this ball take place ? " asked anne of austria .
louis xiii felt instinctively that he ought not to reply to this question , the queen having put it in an almost dying voice .
" oh , very shortly , madame , " said he ; " but i do not precisely recollect the date of the day .
i will ask the cardinal . " " it was the cardinal , then , who informed you of this fete ? "
" yes , madame , " replied the astonished king ; " but why do you ask that ? "
" it was he who told you to invite me to appear with these studs ? "
" that is to say , madame-- "
" it was he , sire , it was he ! "
" well , and what does it signify whether it was he or i ? is there any crime in this request ? "
" no , sire . "
" then you will appear ? "
" yes , sire . "
" that is well , " said the king , retiring , " that is well ; i count upon it . "
the queen made a curtsy , less from etiquette than because her knees were sinking under her .
the king went away enchanted .
" i am lost , " murmured the queen , " lost!--for the cardinal knows all , and it is he who urges on the king , who as yet knows nothing but will soon know everything .
i am lost !
my god , my god , my god ! "
she knelt upon a cushion and prayed , with her head buried between her palpitating arms .
in fact , her position was terrible .
buckingham had returned to london ; mme . chevreuse was at tours .
more closely watched than ever , the queen felt certain , without knowing how to tell which , that one of her women had betrayed her .
laporte could not leave the louvre ; she had not a soul in the world in whom she could confide .
thus , while contemplating the misfortune which threatened her and the abandonment in which she was left , she broke out into sobs and tears .
" can i be of service to your majesty ? " said all at once a voice full of sweetness and pity .
the queen turned sharply round , for there could be no deception in the expression of that voice ; it was a friend who spoke thus .
in fact , at one of the doors which opened into the queen s apartment appeared the pretty mme . bonacieux . she had been engaged in arranging the dresses and linen in a closet when the king entered ; she could not get out and had heard all .
the queen uttered a piercing cry at finding herself surprised -- for in her trouble she did not at first recognize the young woman who had been given to her by laporte .
" oh , fear nothing , madame ! " said the young woman , clasping her hands and weeping herself at the queen s sorrows ; " i am your majesty s , body and soul , and however far i may be from you , however inferior may be my position , i believe i have discovered a means of extricating your majesty from your trouble . "
i am betrayed on all sides . can i trust in you ? "
this expression sprang from the very bottom of the heart , and , like the first , there was no mistaking it .
" yes , " continued mme . bonacieux , " yes , there are traitors here ; but by the holy name of the virgin , i swear that no one is more devoted to your majesty than i am .
those studs which the king speaks of , you gave them to the duke of buckingham , did you not ?
those studs were enclosed in a little rosewood box which he held under his arm ?
am i deceived ?
is it not so , madame ? "
" oh , my god , my god ! " murmured the queen , whose teeth chattered with fright .
" well , those studs , " continued mme . bonacieux , " we must have them back again . "
" yes , without doubt , it is necessary , " cried the queen ; " but how am i to act ? how can it be effected ? "
" someone must be sent to the duke . "
" but who , who ? in whom can i trust ? "
" place confidence in me , madame ; do me that honor , my queen , and i will find a messenger . "
" but i must write . "
" oh , yes ; that is indispensable .
two words from the hand of your majesty and your private seal . "
" but these two words would bring about my condemnation , divorce , exile ! "
" yes , if they fell into infamous hands . but i will answer for these two words being delivered to their address . "
" oh , my god ! i must then place my life , my honor , my reputation , in your hands ? "
" yes , yes , madame , you must ; and i will save them all . "
" but how ? tell me at least the means . "
" my husband had been at liberty these two or three days . i have not yet had time to see him again .
he is a worthy , honest man who entertains neither love nor hatred for anybody .
he will do anything i wish . he will set out upon receiving an order from me , without knowing what he carries , and he will carry your majesty s letter , without even knowing it is from your majesty , to the address which is on it . "
the queen took the two hands of the young woman with a burst of emotion , gazed at her as if to read her very heart , and seeing nothing but sincerity in her beautiful eyes , embraced her tenderly .
" do that , " cried she , " and you will have saved my life , you will have saved my honor ! "
" do not exaggerate the service i have the happiness to render your majesty . i have nothing to save for your majesty ; you are only the victim of perfidious plots . "
" that is true , that is true , my child , " said the queen , " you are right . "
" give me then , that letter , madame ; time presses . "
the queen ran to a little table , on which were ink , paper , and pens . she wrote two lines , sealed the letter with her private seal , and gave it to mme . bonacieux .
" and now , " said the queen , " we are forgetting one very necessary thing . "
" what is that , madame ? "
" money . "
mme . bonacieux blushed .
" yes , that is true , " said she , " and i will confess to your majesty that my husband-- "
" your husband has none . is that what you would say ? "
" he has some , but he is very avaricious ; that is his fault .
nevertheless , let not your majesty be uneasy , we will find means . "
" and i have none , either , " said the queen . those who have read the memoirs of mme . de motteville will not be astonished at this reply . " but wait a minute . "
take this ring ; raise money with it , and let your husband set out . "
" in an hour you shall be obeyed . "
" you see the address , " said the queen , speaking so low that mme . bonacieux could hardly hear what she said , " to my lord duke of buckingham , london . "
" the letter shall be given to himself . "
" generous girl ! " cried anne of austria .
mme . bonacieux kissed the hands of the queen , concealed the paper in the bosom of her dress , and disappeared with the lightness of a bird .
as to the servant , she had run away at the moment of her master s arrest .
terror had had such an effect upon the poor girl that she had never ceased walking from paris till she reached burgundy , her native place .
the worthy mercer had , immediately upon re - entering his house , informed his wife of his happy return , and his wife had replied by congratulating him , and telling him that the first moment she could steal from her duties should be devoted to paying him a visit .
this first moment had been delayed five days , which , under any other circumstances , might have appeared rather long to m. bonacieux ; but he had , in the visit he had made to the cardinal and in the visits rochefort had made him , ample subjects for reflection , and as everybody knows , nothing makes time pass more quickly than reflection .
this was the more so because bonacieux s reflections were all rose - colored .
rochefort called him his friend , his dear bonacieux , and never ceased telling him that the cardinal had a great respect for him .
the mercer fancied himself already on the high road to honors and fortune .
on her side mme . bonacieux had also reflected ; but , it must be admitted , upon something widely different from ambition . in spite of herself her thoughts constantly reverted to that handsome young man who was so brave and appeared to be so much in love . married at eighteen to m. bonacieux , having always lived among her husband s friends -- people little capable of inspiring any sentiment whatever in a young woman whose heart was above her position -- mme . bonacieux had remained insensible to vulgar seductions ; but at this period the title of gentleman had great influence with the citizen class , and dartagnan was a gentleman . besides , he wore the uniform of the guards , which next to that of the musketeers was most admired by the ladies .
he was , we repeat , handsome , young , and bold ; he spoke of love like a man who did love and was anxious to be loved in return . there was certainly enough in all this to turn a head only twenty - three years old , and mme . bonacieux had just attained that happy period of life .
the couple , then , although they had not seen each other for eight days , and during that time serious events had taken place in which both were concerned , accosted each other with a degree of preoccupation . nevertheless , bonacieux manifested real joy , and advanced toward his wife with open arms .
madame bonacieux presented her cheek to him .
" let us talk a little , " said she .
" how ! " said bonacieux , astonished .
" yes , i have something of the highest importance to tell you . "
" true , " said he , " and i have some questions sufficiently serious to put to you .
describe to me your abduction , i pray you . "
" oh , that s of no consequence just now , " said mme . bonacieux .
" and what does it concern , then -- my captivity ? "
" i heard of it the day it happened ; but as you were not guilty of any crime , as you were not guilty of any intrigue , as you , in short , knew nothing that could compromise yourself or anybody else , i attached no more importance to that event than it merited . "
" you speak very much at your ease , madame , " said bonacieux , hurt at the little interest his wife showed in him . " do you know that i was plunged during a day and night in a dungeon of the bastille ? "
" oh , a day and night soon pass away . let us return to the object that brings me here . "
" what , that which brings you home to me ?
is it not the desire of seeing a husband again from whom you have been separated for a week ? " asked the mercer , piqued to the quick .
" yes , that first , and other things afterward . "
" speak . "
" it is a thing of the highest interest , and upon which our future fortune perhaps depends . "
" yes , particularly if you follow the instructions i am about to give you . "
" me ? "
" yes , you .
there is good and holy action to be performed , monsieur , and much money to be gained at the same time . "
mme . bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband , she took him on his weak side .
but a man , were he even a mercer , when he had talked for ten minutes with cardinal richelieu , is no longer the same man .
" much money to be gained ? " said bonacieux , protruding his lip .
" yes , much . "
" about how much ? "
" a thousand pistoles , perhaps . "
" what you demand of me is serious , then ? "
" it is indeed . "
" what must be done ? "
" you must go away immediately . i will give you a paper which you must not part with on any account , and which you will deliver into the proper hands . "
" and whither am i to go ? "
" to london . "
" i go to london ? go to !
you jest ! i have no business in london . "
" but others wish that you should go there . "
" but who are those others ?
i warn you that i will never again work in the dark , and that i will know not only to what i expose myself , but for whom i expose myself . "
" an illustrious person sends you ; an illustrious person awaits you . the recompense will exceed your expectations ; that is all i promise you . "
" more intrigues ! nothing but intrigues ! thank you , madame , i am aware of them now ; monsieur cardinal has enlightened me on that head . "
" the cardinal ? " cried mme . bonacieux . " have you seen the cardinal ? "
" he sent for me , " answered the mercer , proudly .
" and you responded to his bidding , you imprudent man ? "
" well , i ca nt say i had much choice of going or not going , for i was taken to him between two guards .
" he gave me his hand , and called me his friend . his friend !
" of the great cardinal ! "
" perhaps you would contest his right to that title , madame ? "
" i would contest nothing ; but i tell you that the favor of a minister is ephemeral , and that a man must be mad to attach himself to a minister . there are powers above his which do not depend upon a man or the issue of an event ; it is to these powers we should rally . "
" i am sorry for it , madame , but i acknowledge not her power but that of the great man whom i have the honor to serve . "
" you serve the cardinal ? "
" yes , madame ; and as his servant , i will not allow you to be concerned in plots against the safety of the state , or to serve the intrigues of a woman who is not french and who has a spanish heart .
fortunately we have the great cardinal ; his vigilant eye watches over and penetrates to the bottom of the heart . "
bonacieux was repeating , word for word , a sentence which he had heard from the comte de rochefort ; but the poor wife , who had reckoned on her husband , and who , in that hope , had answered for him to the queen , did not tremble the less , both at the danger into which she had nearly cast herself and at the helpless state to which she was reduced .
nevertheless , knowing the weakness of her husband , and more particularly his cupidity , she did not despair of bringing him round to her purpose .
" ah , you are a cardinalist , then , monsieur , are you ? " cried she ; " and you serve the party of those who maltreat your wife and insult your queen ? "
" private interests are as nothing before the interests of all .
i am for those who save the state , " said bonacieux , emphatically .
" and what do you know about the state you talk of ? " said mme . bonacieux , shrugging her shoulders .
" be satisfied with being a plain , straightforward citizen , and turn to that side which offers the most advantages . "
" eh , eh ! " said bonacieux , slapping a plump , round bag , which returned a sound a money ; " what do you think of this , madame preacher ? "
" whence comes that money ? "
" you do not guess ? "
" from the cardinal ? "
" from him , and from my friend the comte de rochefort . "
" the comte de rochefort ! why it was he who carried me off ! "
" that may be , madame ! "
" and you receive silver from that man ? "
" have you not said that that abduction was entirely political ? "
" yes ; but that abduction had for its object the betrayal of my mistress , to draw from me by torture confessions that might compromise the honor , and perhaps the life , of my august mistress . "
" madame , " replied bonacieux , " your august mistress is a perfidious spaniard , and what the cardinal does is well done . "
" monsieur , " said the young woman , " i know you to be cowardly , avaricious , and foolish , but i never till now believed you infamous ! "
" madame , " said bonacieux , who had never seen his wife in a passion , and who recoiled before this conjugal anger , " madame , what do you say ? "
" i say you are a miserable creature ! " continued mme . bonacieux , who saw she was regaining some little influence over her husband .
" you meddle with politics , do you -- and still more , with cardinalist politics ?
why , you sell yourself , body and soul , to the demon , the devil , for money ! "
" no , to the cardinal . "
" it s the same thing , " cried the young woman .
" who calls richelieu calls satan . "
" hold your tongue , hold your tongue , madame ! you may be overheard . "
" yes , you are right ; i should be ashamed for anyone to know your baseness . "
" but what do you require of me , then ? let us see . "
you must depart instantly , monsieur . you must accomplish loyally the commission with which i deign to charge you , and on that condition i pardon everything , i forget everything ; and what is more , " and she held out her hand to him , " i restore my love . "
bonacieux was cowardly and avaricious , but he loved his wife .
he was softened . a man of fifty can not long bear malice with a wife of twenty - three .
mme . bonacieux saw that he hesitated .
" come ! have you decided ? " said she .
" but , my dear love , reflect a little upon what you require of me . london is far from paris , very far , and perhaps the commission with which you charge me is not without dangers ? "
" what matters it , if you avoid them ? "
" hold , madame bonacieux , " said the mercer , " hold ! i positively refuse ; intrigues terrify me .
i have seen the bastille . my !
whew ! that s a frightful place , that bastille !
only to think of it makes my flesh crawl .
they threatened me with torture .
do you know what torture is ?
wooden points that they stick in between your legs till your bones stick out ! no , positively i will not go .
and , morbleu , why do you not go yourself ?
" and you , you are a woman -- a miserable woman , stupid and brutal .
you are afraid , are you ?
well , if you do not go this very instant , i will have you arrested by the queen s orders , and i will have you placed in the bastille which you dread so much . "
bonacieux fell into a profound reflection . he weighed the two angers in his brain -- that of the cardinal and that of the queen ; that of the cardinal predominated enormously .
" have me arrested on the part of the queen , " said he , " and i -- i will appeal to his eminence . "
at once mme . bonacieux saw that she had gone too far , and she was terrified at having communicated so much .
she for a moment contemplated with fright that stupid countenance , impressed with the invincible resolution of a fool that is overcome by fear .
" well , be it so ! " said she .
" perhaps , when all is considered , you are right . in the long run , a man knows more about politics than a woman , particularly such as , like you , monsieur bonacieux , have conversed with the cardinal .
and yet it is very hard , " added she , " that a man upon whose affection i thought i might depend , treats me thus unkindly and will not comply with any of my fancies . "
" that is because your fancies go too far , " replied the triumphant bonacieux , " and i mistrust them . "
" at least you should tell me what i should have to do in london , " replied bonacieux , who remembered a little too late that rochefort had desired him to endeavor to obtain his wife s secrets .
" it is of no use for you to know anything about it , " said the young woman , whom an instinctive mistrust now impelled to draw back . " it was about one of those purchases that interest women -- a purchase by which much might have been gained . "
but the more the young woman excused herself , the more important bonacieux thought the secret which she declined to confide to him .
he resolved then to hasten immediately to the residence of the comte de rochefort , and tell him that the queen was seeking for a messenger to send to london .
" thank you , monsieur , you are not brave enough to be of any use to me whatever , " replied mme . bonacieux . " i shall return very safely to the louvre all alone . "
" as you please , madame bonacieux , " said the ex - mercer .
" shall i see you again soon ? "
" next week i hope my duties will afford me a little liberty , and i will take advantage of it to come and put things in order here , as they must necessarily be much deranged . "
" very well ; i shall expect you .
you are not angry with me ? "
" not the least in the world . "
" till then , then ? "
" till then . "
bonacieux kissed his wife s hand , and set off at a quick pace .
" well , " said mme . bonacieux , when her husband had shut the street door and she found herself alone ; " that imbecile lacked but one thing to become a cardinalist .
and i , who have answered for him to the queen -- i , who have promised my poor mistress -- ah , my god , my god !
she will take me for one of those wretches with whom the palace swarms and who are placed about her as spies !
ah , monsieur bonacieux , i never did love you much , but now it is worse than ever . i hate you , and on my word you shall pay for this ! "
at the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made her raise her head , and a voice which reached her through the ceiling cried , " dear madame bonacieux , open for me the little door on the alley , and i will come down to you . "
18 lover and husband
" you have , then , overheard our conversation ? " asked mme . bonacieux , eagerly , and looking at dartagnan with disquiet .
" the whole . "
" but how , my god ? "
" by a mode of proceeding known to myself , and by which i likewise overheard the more animated conversation which he had with the cardinal s police . "
" and what did you understand by what we said ? "
i have at least two of the three qualities you stand in need of , and here i am . "
mme . bonacieux made no reply ; but her heart beat with joy and secret hope shone in her eyes .
" and what guarantee will you give me , " asked she , " if i consent to confide this message to you ? "
" my love for you . speak !
command ! what is to be done ? "
" my god , my god ! " murmured the young woman , " ought i to confide such a secret to you , monsieur ?
you are almost a boy . "
" i see that you require someone to answer for me ? "
" i admit that would reassure me greatly . "
" do you know athos ? "
" no . "
" porthos ? "
" no . "
" aramis ? "
" no .
who are these gentleman ? "
" three of the king s musketeers .
do you know monsieur de treville , their captain ? "
" oh , yes , him ! i know him ; not personally , but from having heard the queen speak of him more than once as a brave and loyal gentleman . "
" you do not fear lest he should betray you to the cardinal ? "
" oh , no , certainly not ! "
" but this secret is not mine , and i can not reveal it in this manner . "
" you were about to confide it to monsieur bonacieux , " said dartagnan , with chagrin .
" as one confides a letter to the hollow of a tree , to the wing of a pigeon , to the collar of a dog . "
" and yet , me -- you see plainly that i love you . "
" you say so . "
" i am an honorable man . "
" you say so . "
" i am a gallant fellow . "
" i believe it . "
" i am brave . " " oh , i am sure of that ! "
" then , put me to the proof . "
mme . bonacieux looked at the young man , restrained for a minute by a last hesitation ; but there was such an ardor in his eyes , such persuasion in his voice , that she felt herself constrained to confide in him .
besides , she found herself in circumstances where everything must be risked for the sake of everything .
" listen , " said she ; " i yield to your protestations , i yield to your assurances .
but i swear to you , before god who hears us , that if you betray me , and my enemies pardon me , i will kill myself , while accusing you of my death . "
" and i -- i swear to you before god , madame , " said dartagnan , " that if i am taken while accomplishing the orders you give me , i will die sooner than do anything that may compromise anyone . "
then the young woman confided in him the terrible secret of which chance had already communicated to him a part in front of the samaritaine .
this was their mutual declaration of love .
dartagnan was radiant with joy and pride .
confidence and love made him a giant .
" by my soul , you had made me forget all that , dear constance ! yes , you are right ; a furlough is needful . "
" still another obstacle , " murmured mme . bonacieux , sorrowfully .
" as to that , " cried dartagnan , after a moment of reflection , " i shall surmount it , be assured . "
" how so ? "
" i will go this very evening to treville , whom i will request to ask this favor for me of his brother - in - law , monsieur dessessart . "
" but another thing . "
" what ? " asked dartagnan , seeing that mme . bonacieux hesitated to continue .
" you have , perhaps , no money ? "
" perhaps is too much , " said dartagnan , smiling .
" then , " replied mme . bonacieux , opening a cupboard and taking from it the very bag which a half hour before her husband had caressed so affectionately , " take this bag . "
" the cardinal s ? " cried dartagnan , breaking into a loud laugh , he having heard , as may be remembered , thanks to the broken boards , every syllable of the conversation between the mercer and his wife .
" the cardinal s , " replied mme . bonacieux . " you see it makes a very respectable appearance . "
" pardieu , " cried dartagnan , " it will be a double amusing affair to save the queen with the cardinal s money ! "
" you are an amiable and charming young man , " said mme . bonacieux .
" be assured you will not find her majesty ungrateful . "
" oh , i am already grandly recompensed ! " cried dartagnan .
" i love you ; you permit me to tell you that i do -- that is already more happiness than i dared to hope . "
" silence ! " said mme . bonacieux , starting .
" what ! "
" someone is talking in the street . "
" it is the voice of-- "
" of my husband !
yes , i recognize it ! "
dartagnan ran to the door and pushed the bolt .
" he shall not come in before i am gone , " said he ; " and when i am gone , you can open to him . "
" but i ought to be gone , too .
and the disappearance of his money ; how am i to justify it if i am here ? "
" you are right ; we must go out . "
" go out ? how ?
he will see us if we go out . "
" then you must come up into my room . "
" ah , " said mme . bonacieux , " you speak that in a tone that frightens me ! "
mme . bonacieux pronounced these words with tears in her eyes . dartagnan saw those tears , and much disturbed , softened , he threw himself at her feet .
" with me you will be as safe as in a temple ; i give you my word of a gentleman . "
" let us go , " said she , " i place full confidence in you , my friend ! "
dartagnan drew back the bolt with precaution , and both , light as shadows , glided through the interior door into the passage , ascended the stairs as quietly as possible , and entered dartagnan s chambers .
once there , for greater security , the young man barricaded the door . they both approached the window , and through a slit in the shutter they saw bonacieux talking with a man in a cloak .
at sight of this man , dartagnan started , and half drawing his sword , sprang toward the door .
it was the man of meung .
" what are you going to do ? " cried mme . bonacieux ; " you will ruin us all ! "
" but i have sworn to kill that man ! " said dartagnan .
" your life is devoted from this moment , and does not belong to you .
" and do you command nothing in your own name ? "
" in my name , " said mme . bonacieux , with great emotion , " in my name i beg you !
but listen ; they appear to be speaking of me . "
dartagnan drew near the window , and lent his ear .
m bonacieux had opened his door , and seeing the apartment , had returned to the man in the cloak , whom he had left alone for an instant .
" she is gone , " said he ; " she must have returned to the louvre . "
" you are sure , " replied the stranger , " that she did not suspect the intentions with which you went out ? "
" no , " replied bonacieux , with a self - sufficient air , " she is too superficial a woman . "
" is the young guardsman at home ? "
" i do not think he is ; as you see , his shutter is closed , and you can see no light shine through the chinks of the shutters . "
" all the same , it is well to be certain . "
" how so ? "
" by knocking at his door . go . "
" i will ask his servant . "
bonacieux re - entered the house , passed through the same door that had afforded a passage for the two fugitives , went up to dartagnan s door , and knocked .
no one answered .
porthos , in order to make a greater display , had that evening borrowed planchet .
as to dartagnan , he took care not to give the least sign of existence .
the moment the hand of bonacieux sounded on the door , the two young people felt their hearts bound within them .
" there is nobody within , " said bonacieux .
" never mind . let us return to your apartment . we shall be safer there than in the doorway . "
" ah , my god ! " whispered mme . bonacieux , " we shall hear no more . "
" on the contrary , " said dartagnan , " we shall hear better . "
dartagnan raised the three or four boards which made his chamber another ear of dionysius , spread a carpet on the floor , went upon his knees , and made a sign to mme . bonacieux to stoop as he did toward the opening .
" you are sure there is nobody there ? " said the stranger .
" i will answer for it , " said bonacieux .
" and you think that your wife-- "
" has returned to the louvre . "
" without speaking to anyone but yourself ? "
" i am sure of it . "
" that is an important point , do you understand ? "
" then the news i brought you is of value ? "
" the greatest , my dear bonacieux ; i do nt conceal this from you . "
" then the cardinal will be pleased with me ? "
" i have no doubt of it . "
" the great cardinal ! "
" are you sure , in her conversation with you , that your wife mentioned no names ? "
" i think not . "
" she did not name madame de chevreuse , the duke of buckingham , or madame de vernet ? "
" no ; she only told me she wished to send me to london to serve the interests of an illustrious personage . "
" the traitor ! " murmured mme . bonacieux .
" silence ! " said dartagnan , taking her hand , which , without thinking of it , she abandoned to him .
" and i ? "
" well you -- the cardinal would have given you letters of nobility . "
" did he tell you so ? "
" yes , i know that he meant to afford you that agreeable surprise . "
" be satisfied , " replied bonacieux ; " my wife adores me , and there is yet time . "
" the ninny ! " murmured mme . bonacieux .
" silence ! " said dartagnan , pressing her hand more closely .
" how is there still time ? " asked the man in the cloak .
" i go to the louvre ; i ask for mme . bonacieux ; i say that i have reflected ; i renew the affair ; i obtain the letter , and i run directly to the cardinal . "
" well , go quickly ! i will return soon to learn the result of your trip . "
the stranger went out .
" infamous ! " said mme . bonacieux , addressing this epithet to her husband .
" silence ! " said dartagnan , pressing her hand still more warmly .
a terrible howling interrupted these reflections of dartagnan and mme . bonacieux .
it was her husband , who had discovered the disappearance of the moneybag , and was crying " thieves ! "
" oh , my god ! " cried mme . bonacieux , " he will rouse the whole quarter . "
bonacieux called a long time ; but as such cries , on account of their frequency , brought nobody in the rue des fossoyeurs , and as lately the mercer s house had a bad name , finding that nobody came , he went out continuing to call , his voice being heard fainter and fainter as he went in the direction of the rue du bac .
" now he is gone , it is your turn to get out , " said mme . bonacieux . " courage , my friend , but above all , prudence , and think what you owe to the queen . "
" to her and to you ! " cried dartagnan .
" be satisfied , beautiful constance . i shall become worthy of her gratitude ; but shall i likewise return worthy of your love ? "
the young woman only replied by the beautiful glow which mounted to her cheeks .
a few seconds afterward dartagnan also went out enveloped in a large cloak , which ill - concealed the sheath of a long sword .
19 plan of campaign
dartagnan went straight to m. de treville s .
he had reflected that in a few minutes the cardinal would be warned by this cursed stranger , who appeared to be his agent , and he judged , with reason , he had not a moment to lose .
the heart of the young man overflowed with joy .
this chance did , then , for him at once more than he would have dared to ask of providence .
m de treville was in his saloon with his habitual court of gentlemen .
dartagnan , who was known as a familiar of the house , went straight to his office , and sent word that he wished to see him on something of importance .
dartagnan had been there scarcely five minutes when m. de treville entered .
at the first glance , and by the joy which was painted on his countenance , the worthy captain plainly perceived that something new was on foot .
but m. de treville had always been so thoroughly his friend , had always been so devoted to the king and queen , and hated the cardinal so cordially , that the young man resolved to tell him everything .
" did you ask for me , my good friend ? " said m. de treville .
" yes , monsieur , " said dartagnan , lowering his voice , " and you will pardon me , i hope , for having disturbed you when you know the importance of my business . "
" speak , then , i am all attention . "
" what did you say ? " asked m. de treville , glancing round to see if they were surely alone , and then fixing his questioning look upon dartagnan .
" i say , monsieur , that chance has rendered me master of a secret-- "
" which you will guard , i hope , young man , as your life . "
" but which i must impart to you , monsieur , for you alone can assist me in the mission i have just received from her majesty . "
" is this secret your own ? "
" no , monsieur ; it is her majesty s . "
" are you authorized by her majesty to communicate it to me ? "
" no , monsieur , for , on the contrary , i am desired to preserve the profoundest mystery . "
" why , then , are you about to betray it to me ? "
" because , as i said , without you i can do nothing ; and i am afraid you will refuse me the favor i come to ask if you do not know to what end i ask it . "
" keep your secret , young man , and tell me what you wish . "
" i wish you to obtain for me , from monsieur dessessart , leave of absence for fifteen days . "
" when ? "
" this very night . "
" you leave paris ? "
" i am going on a mission . "
" may you tell me whither ? "
" to london . "
" has anyone an interest in preventing your arrival there ? "
" the cardinal , i believe , would give the world to prevent my success . "
" and you are going alone ? "
" i am going alone . "
" in that case you will not get beyond bondy . i tell you so , by the faith of de treville . "
" how so ? "
" you will be assassinated . "
" and i shall die in the performance of my duty . "
" but your mission will not be accomplished . "
" that is true , " replied dartagnan .
" believe me , " continued treville , " in enterprises of this kind , in order that one may arrive , four must set out . "
" ah , you are right , monsieur , " said dartagnan ; " but you know athos , porthos , and aramis , and you know if i can dispose of them . "
" without confiding to them the secret which i am not willing to know ? "
" we are sworn , once for all , to implicit confidence and devotedness against all proof . besides , you can tell them that you have full confidence in me , and they will not be more incredulous than you . "
" i can send to each of them leave of absence for fifteen days , that is all -- to athos , whose wound still makes him suffer , to go to the waters of forges ; to porthos and aramis to accompany their friend , whom they are not willing to abandon in such a painful condition .
sending their leave of absence will be proof enough that i authorize their journey . "
" thanks , monsieur . you are a hundred times too good . "
" begone , then , find them instantly , and let all be done tonight !
ha ! but first write your request to dessessart .
perhaps you had a spy at your heels ; and your visit , if it should ever be known to the cardinal , will thus seem legitimate . "
dartagnan drew up his request , and m. de treville , on receiving it , assured him that by two oclock in the morning the four leaves of absence should be at the respective domiciles of the travelers .
" have the goodness to send mine to athos s residence .
i should dread some disagreeable encounter if i were to go home . "
" be easy .
adieu , and a prosperous voyage .
a propos , " said m. de treville , calling him back .
dartagnan returned .
" have you any money ? "
dartagnan tapped the bag he had in his pocket .
" enough ? " asked m. de treville .
" three hundred pistoles . "
dartagnan saluted m. de treville , who held out his hand to him ; dartagnan pressed it with a respect mixed with gratitude .
since his first arrival at paris , he had had constant occasion to honor this excellent man , whom he had always found worthy , loyal , and great .
his first visit was to aramis , at whose residence he had not been since the famous evening on which he had followed mme . bonacieux .
still further , he had seldom seen the young musketeer ; but every time he had seen him , he had remarked a deep sadness imprinted on his countenance .
this evening , especially , aramis was melancholy and thoughtful . dartagnan asked some questions about this prolonged melancholy . aramis pleaded as his excuse a commentary upon the eighteenth chapter of st . augustine , which he was forced to write in latin for the following week , and which preoccupied him a good deal .
after the two friends had been chatting a few moments , a servant from m. de treville entered , bringing a sealed packet .
" what is that ? " asked aramis .
" the leave of absence monsieur has asked for , " replied the lackey . " for me !
i have asked for no leave of absence . "
" hold your tongue and take it ! " said dartagnan .
" and you , my friend , there is a demipistole for your trouble ; you will tell monsieur de treville that monsieur aramis is very much obliged to him .
go . "
the lackey bowed to the ground and departed .
" what does all this mean ? " asked aramis .
" pack up all you want for a journey of a fortnight , and follow me . "
" but i can not leave paris just now without knowing-- "
aramis stopped .
" what is become of her ? i suppose you mean-- " continued dartagnan .
" become of whom ? " replied aramis .
" the woman who was here -- the woman with the embroidered handkerchief . "
" who told you there was a woman here ? " replied aramis , becoming as pale as death .
" i saw her . "
" and you know who she is ? "
" i believe i can guess , at least . "
" listen ! " said aramis . " since you appear to know so many things , can you tell me what is become of that woman ? "
" i presume that she has returned to tours . "
" to tours ? yes , that may be . you evidently know her .
but why did she return to tours without telling me anything ? "
" because she was in fear of being arrested . "
" why has she not written to me , then ? "
" because she was afraid of compromising you . "
" dartagnan , you restore me to life ! " cried aramis .
" i fancied myself despised , betrayed .
i was so delighted to see her again !
i could not have believed she would risk her liberty for me , and yet for what other cause could she have returned to paris ? "
" for the cause which today takes us to england . "
" and what is this cause ? " demanded aramis .
" oh , you ll know it someday , aramis ; but at present i must imitate the discretion of  the doctor s niece .  "
aramis smiled , as he remembered the tale he had told his friends on a certain evening .
" well , then , since she has left paris , and you are sure of it , dartagnan , nothing prevents me , and i am ready to follow you .
you say we are going-- "
" to see athos now , and if you will come thither , i beg you to make haste , for we have lost much time already .
a propos , inform bazin . "
" will bazin go with us ? " asked aramis .
" perhaps so .
at all events , it is best that he should follow us to athos s . "
aramis called bazin , and , after having ordered him to join them at athos s residence , said " let us go then , " at the same time taking his cloak , sword , and three pistols , opening uselessly two or three drawers to see if he could not find stray coin .
only as they went out aramis placed his hand upon the arm of dartagnan , and looking at him earnestly , " you have not spoken of this lady ? " said he .
" to nobody in the world . "
" not even to athos or porthos ? "
" i have not breathed a syllable to them . "
" good enough ! "
tranquil on this important point , aramis continued his way with dartagnan , and both soon arrived at athos s dwelling .
they found him holding his leave of absence in one hand , and m. de treville s note in the other .
" can you explain to me what signify this leave of absence and this letter , which i have just received ? " said the astonished athos .
my dear athos , i wish , as your health absolutely requires it , that you should rest for a fortnight .
yours affectionate ,
de treville
" well , this leave of absence and that letter mean that you must follow me , athos . "
" to the waters of forges ? "
" there or elsewhere . "
" in the king s service ? "
" either the king s or the queen s . are we not their majesties  servants ? "
at that moment porthos entered .
" since , " said dartagnan , " they have friends who ask it for them . "
" ah , ah ! " said porthos , " it appears there s something fresh here . "
" yes , we are going-- " said aramis .
" to what country ? " demanded porthos .
" my faith ! i do nt know much about it , " said athos . " ask dartagnan . "
" to london , gentlemen , " said dartagnan .
" to london ! " cried porthos ; " and what the devil are we going to do in london ? "
" that is what i am not at liberty to tell you , gentlemen ; you must trust to me . "
" but in order to go to london , " added porthos , " money is needed , and i have none . "
" nor i , " said aramis .
" nor i , " said athos .
" i have , " replied dartagnan , pulling out his treasure from his pocket , and placing it on the table .
" there are in this bag three hundred pistoles . let each take seventy - five ; that is enough to take us to london and back .
besides , make yourselves easy ; we shall not all arrive at london . "
" why so ? "
" because , in all probability , some one of us will be left on the road . "
" is this , then , a campaign upon which we are now entering ? "
" one of a most dangerous kind , i give you notice . "
" ah ! but if we do risk being killed , " said porthos , " at least i should like to know what for . "
" you would be all the wiser , " said athos .
" and yet , " said aramis , " i am somewhat of porthos s opinion . "
" is the king accustomed to give you such reasons ? no .
he says to you jauntily ,  gentlemen , there is fighting going on in gascony or in flanders ; go and fight ,  and you go there . why ?
you need give yourselves no more uneasiness about this . "
" dartagnan is right , " said athos ; " here are our three leaves of absence which came from monsieur de treville , and here are three hundred pistoles which came from i do nt know where .
so let us go and get killed where we are told to go .
is life worth the trouble of so many questions ?
dartagnan , i am ready to follow you . "
" and i also , " said porthos .
" and i also , " said aramis .
" and , indeed , i am not sorry to quit paris ; i had need of distraction . "
" well , you will have distractions enough , gentlemen , be assured , " said dartagnan .
" and , now , when are we to go ? " asked athos .
" immediately , " replied dartagnan ; " we have not a minute to lose . " " hello , grimaud !
each musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel , as at a barrack , his own horse and that of his lackey .
planchet , grimaud , mousqueton , and bazin set off at full speed .
" now let us lay down the plan of campaign , " said porthos .
" where do we go first ? "
" to calais , " said dartagnan ; " that is the most direct line to london . "
" well , " said porthos , " this is my advice-- "
" speak ! "
dartagnan will give each of us his instructions . i will go by the way of boulogne to clear the way ; athos will set out two hours after , by that of amiens ; aramis will follow us by that of noyon ; as to dartagnan , he will go by what route he thinks is best , in planchet s clothes , while planchet will follow us like dartagnan , in the uniform of the guards . "
" gentlemen , " said athos , " my opinion is that it is not proper to allow lackeys to have anything to do in such an affair . a secret may , by chance , be betrayed by gentlemen ; but it is almost always sold by lackeys . "
" porthos s plan appears to me to be impracticable , " said dartagnan , " inasmuch as i am myself ignorant of what instructions i can give you .
i am the bearer of a letter , that is all .
we must , then , as it appears to me , travel in company .
" if i should be killed , one of you must take it , and continue the route ; if he be killed , it will be another s turn , and so on -- provided a single one arrives , that is all that is required . "
if anyone wishes to stop us , i will show monsieur de treville s letter , and you will show your leaves of absence .
we will arm our four lackeys with pistols and musketoons ; if they send an army out against us , we will give battle , and the survivor , as dartagnan says , will carry the letter . "
" well said , " cried aramis ; " you do nt often speak , athos , but when you do speak , it is like st . john of the golden mouth .
i agree to athos s plan .
and you , porthos ? "
" i agree to it , too , " said porthos , " if dartagnan approves of it .
dartagnan , being the bearer of the letter , is naturally the head of the enterprise ; let him decide , and we will execute . "
" well , " said dartagnan , " i decide that we should adopt athos s plan , and that we set off in half an hour . "
" agreed ! " shouted the three musketeers in chorus .
each one , stretching out his hand to the bag , took his seventy - five pistoles , and made his preparations to set out at the time appointed .
20 the journey
with the first rays of day their tongues were loosened ; with the sun gaiety revived . it was like the eve of a battle ; the heart beat , the eyes laughed , and they felt that the life they were perhaps going to lose , was , after all , a good thing .
besides , the appearance of the caravan was formidable . the black horses of the musketeers , their martial carriage , with the regimental step of these noble companions of the soldier , would have betrayed the most strict incognito .
the lackeys followed , armed to the teeth .
all went well till they arrived at chantilly , which they reached about eight oclock in the morning .
they needed breakfast , and alighted at the door of an auberge , recommended by a sign representing st . martin giving half his cloak to a poor man .
they ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle the horses , and to hold themselves in readiness to set off again immediately .
they entered the common hall , and placed themselves at table .
a gentleman , who had just arrived by the route of dammartin , was seated at the same table , and was breakfasting .
he opened the conversation about rain and fine weather ; the travelers replied . he drank to their good health , and the travelers returned his politeness .
but at the moment mousqueton came to announce that the horses were ready , and they were arising from table , the stranger proposed to porthos to drink the health of the cardinal .
porthos replied that he asked no better if the stranger , in his turn , would drink the health of the king .
the stranger cried that he acknowledged no other king but his eminence .
porthos called him drunk , and the stranger drew his sword .
" you have committed a piece of folly , " said athos , " but it ca nt be helped ; there is no drawing back . kill the fellow , and rejoin us as soon as you can . "
all three remounted their horses , and set out at a good pace , while porthos was promising his adversary to perforate him with all the thrusts known in the fencing schools .
" there goes one ! " cried athos , at the end of five hundred paces .
" but why did that man attack porthos rather than any other one of us ? " asked aramis .
" because , as porthos was talking louder than the rest of us , he took him for the chief , " said dartagnan .
" i always said that this cadet from gascony was a well of wisdom , " murmured athos ; and the travelers continued their route .
at beauvais they stopped two hours , as well to breathe their horses a little as to wait for porthos .
at the end of two hours , as porthos did not come , not any news of him , they resumed their journey .
at a league from beauvais , where the road was confined between two high banks , they fell in with eight or ten men who , taking advantage of the road being unpaved in this spot , appeared to be employed in digging holes and filling up the ruts with mud .
aramis , not liking to soil his boots with this artificial mortar , apostrophized them rather sharply .
athos wished to restrain him , but it was too late .
the laborers began to jeer the travelers and by their insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the cool athos , who urged on his horse against one of them .
then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch , from which each took a concealed musket ; the result was that our seven travelers were outnumbered in weapons .
aramis received a ball which passed through his shoulder , and mousqueton another ball which lodged in the fleshy part which prolongs the lower portion of the loins .
therefore mousqueton alone fell from his horse , not because he was severely wounded , but not being able to see the wound , he judged it to be more serious than it really was .
" it was an ambuscade ! " shouted dartagnan . " do nt waste a charge !
forward ! " aramis , wounded as he was , seized the mane of his horse , which carried him on with the others .
mousqueton s horse rejoined them , and galloped by the side of his companions .
" that will serve us for a relay , " said athos .
" i would rather have had a hat , " said dartagnan . " mine was carried away by a ball .
by my faith , it is very fortunate that the letter was not in it . "
" they ll kill poor porthos when he comes up , " said aramis .
" if porthos were on his legs , he would have rejoined us by this time , " said athos .
" my opinion is that on the ground the drunken man was not intoxicated . "
they continued at their best speed for two hours , although the horses were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soon refuse service .
the travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they might meet with less interruption ; but at crevecoeur , aramis declared he could proceed no farther .
in fact , it required all the courage which he concealed beneath his elegant form and polished manners to bear him so far .
i swear by-- "
" do nt waste time in swearing , " said dartagnan ; " let us gallop , if our horses will consent . "
and the travelers buried their rowels in their horses  flanks , who thus vigorously stimulated recovered their energies .
they arrived at amiens at midnight , and alighted at the auberge of the golden lily .
the host replied that he had no other worthy of their excellencies ; but the travelers declared they would sleep in the common chamber , each on a mattress which might be thrown upon the ground .
the host insisted ; but the travelers were firm , and he was obliged to do as they wished .
they had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door within , when someone knocked at the yard shutter ; they demanded who was there , and recognizing the voices of their lackeys , opened the shutter .
it was indeed planchet and grimaud .
" grimaud can take care of the horses , " said planchet . " if you are willing , gentlemen , i will sleep across your doorway , and you will then be certain that nobody can reach you . "
" and on what will you sleep ? " said dartagnan .
" here is my bed , " replied planchet , producing a bundle of straw .
" come , then , " said dartagnan , " you are right .
mine host s face does not please me at all ; it is too gracious . "
" nor me either , " said athos .
planchet mounted by the window and installed himself across the doorway , while grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable , undertaking that by five oclock in the morning he and the four horses should be ready .
the night was quiet enough . toward two oclock in the morning somebody endeavored to open the door ; but as planchet awoke in an instant and cried , " who goes there ? " somebody replied that he was mistaken , and went away .
when they opened the window , they saw the poor lad lying senseless , with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork .
planchet went down into the yard , and wished to saddle the horses ; but the horses were all used up .
mousqueton s horse which had traveled for five or six hours without a rider the day before , might have been able to pursue the journey ; but by an inconceivable error the veterinary surgeon , who had been sent for , as it appeared , to bleed one of the host s horses , had bled mousqueton s .
this began to be annoying . all these successive accidents were perhaps the result of chance ; but they might be the fruits of a plot .
athos and dartagnan went out , while planchet was sent to inquire if there were not three horses for sale in the neighborhood .
at the door stood two horses , fresh , strong , and fully equipped .
these would just have suited them .
he asked where their masters were , and was informed that they had passed the night in the inn , and were then settling their bill with the host .
athos went down to pay the reckoning , while dartagnan and planchet stood at the street door . the host was in a lower and back room , to which athos was requested to go .
he took the money which athos offered to him , and after turning and turning it over and over in his hands , suddenly cried out that it was bad , and that he would have him and his companions arrested as forgers .
" you blackguard ! " cried athos , going toward him , " i ll cut your ears off ! "
dartagnan and planchet did not require twice bidding ; they unfastened the two horses that were waiting at the door , leaped upon them , buried their spurs in their sides , and set off at full gallop .
" do you know what has become of athos ? " asked dartagnan of planchet , as they galloped on .
" ah , monsieur , " said planchet , " i saw one fall at each of his two shots , and he appeared to me , through the glass door , to be fighting with his sword with the others . "
you are a brave fellow . "
" as i told you , monsieur , " replied planchet , " picards are found out by being used . besides , i am here in my own country , and that excites me . "
and both , with free use of the spur , arrived at st . omer without drawing bit .
at st . omer they breathed their horses with the bridles passed under their arms for fear of accident , and ate a morsel from their hands on the stones of the street , after they departed again .
at a hundred paces from the gates of calais , dartagnan s horse gave out , and could not by any means be made to get up again , the blood flowing from his eyes and his nose . there still remained planchet s horse ; but he stopped short , and could not be made to move a step .
fortunately , as we have said , they were within a hundred paces of the city ; they left their two nags upon the high road , and ran toward the quay .
planchet called his master s attention to a gentleman who had just arrived with his lackey , and only preceded them by about fifty paces .
they made all speed to come up to this gentleman , who appeared to be in great haste .
his boots were covered with dust , and he inquired if he could not instantly cross over to england .
" nothing would be more easy , " said the captain of a vessel ready to set sail , " but this morning came an order to let no one leave without express permission from the cardinal . "
" i have that permission , " said the gentleman , drawing the paper from his pocket ; " here it is . "
" have it examined by the governor of the port , " said the shipmaster , " and give me the preference . "
" where shall i find the governor ? "
" at his country house . "
" and that is situated ? "
" at a quarter of a league from the city . look , you may see it from here -- at the foot of that little hill , that slated roof . "
" very well , " said the gentleman .
and , with his lackey , he took the road to the governor s country house .
dartagnan and planchet followed the gentleman at a distance of five hundred paces .
once outside the city , dartagnan overtook the gentleman as he was entering a little wood .
" monsieur , you appear to be in great haste ? "
" no one can be more so , monsieur . "
" what ? "
" to let me sail first . "
" that s impossible , " said the gentleman ; " i have traveled sixty leagues in forty hours , and by tomorrow at midday i must be in london . "
" i have performed that same distance in forty hours , and by ten oclock in the morning i must be in london . "
" very sorry , monsieur ; but i was here first , and will not sail second . "
" i am sorry , too , monsieur ; but i arrived second , and must sail first . "
" the king s service ! " said the gentleman .
" my own service ! " said dartagnan .
" but this is a needless quarrel you seek with me , as it seems to me . "
" parbleu ! what do you desire it to be ? "
" what do you want ? "
" would you like to know ? "
" certainly . "
" well , then , i wish that order of which you are bearer , seeing that i have not one of my own and must have one . "
" you jest , i presume . "
" i never jest . "
" let me pass ! "
" you shall not pass . "
" my brave young man , i will blow out your brains .
hola , lubin , my pistols ! "
" planchet , " called out dartagnan , " take care of the lackey ; i will manage the master . "
planchet , emboldened by the first exploit , sprang upon lubin ; and being strong and vigorous , he soon got him on the broad of his back , and placed his knee upon his breast .
" go on with your affair , monsieur , " cried planchet ; " i have finished mine . "
seeing this , the gentleman drew his sword , and sprang upon dartagnan ; but he had too strong an adversary .
in three seconds dartagnan had wounded him three times , exclaiming at each thrust , " one for athos , one for porthos ; and one for aramis ! "
at the third hit the gentleman fell like a log .
dartagnan believed him to be dead , or at least insensible , and went toward him for the purpose of taking the order ; but the moment he extended his hand to search for it , the wounded man , who had not dropped his sword , plunged the point into dartagnan s breast , crying , " one for you ! "
" and one for me -- the best for last ! " cried dartagnan , furious , nailing him to the earth with a fourth thrust through his body .
this time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted .
dartagnan searched his pockets , and took from one of them the order for the passage .
it was in the name of comte de wardes .
then , casting a glance on the handsome young man , who was scarcely twenty - five years of age , and whom he was leaving in his gore , deprived of sense and perhaps dead , he gave a sigh for that unaccountable destiny which leads men to destroy each other for the interests of people who are strangers to them and who often do not even know that they exist .
but he was soon aroused from these reflections by lubin , who uttered loud cries and screamed for help with all his might .
planchet grasped him by the throat , and pressed as hard as he could .
i know him for a norman , and normans are obstinate . "
" stay ! " said dartagnan ; and taking out his handkerchief , he gagged him .
" now , " said planchet , " let us bind him to a tree . "
this being properly done , they drew the comte de wardes close to his servant ; and as night was approaching , and as the wounded man and the bound man were at some little distance within the wood , it was evident they were likely to remain there till the next day .
" and now , " said dartagnan , " to the governor s . "
" but you are wounded , it seems , " said planchet .
" oh , that s nothing ! let us attend to what is more pressing first , and then we will attend to my wound ; besides , it does not seem very dangerous . "
and they both set forward as fast as they could toward the country house of the worthy functionary .
the comte de wardes was announced , and dartagnan was introduced .
" you have an order signed by the cardinal ? " said the governor .
" yes , monsieur , " replied dartagnan ; " here it is . "
" ah , ah ! it is quite regular and explicit , " said the governor .
" most likely , " said dartagnan ; " i am one of his most faithful servants . "
" it appears that his eminence is anxious to prevent someone from crossing to england ? "
" yes ; a certain dartagnan , a bearnese gentleman who left paris in company with three of his friends , with the intention of going to london . "
" do you know him personally ? " asked the governor .
" whom ? "
" this dartagnan . "
" perfectly well . "
" describe him to me , then . "
" nothing more easy . "
and dartagnan gave , feature for feature , a description of the comte de wardes .
" is he accompanied ? "
" yes ; by a lackey named lubin . "
" we will keep a sharp lookout for them ; and if we lay hands on them his eminence may be assured they will be reconducted to paris under a good escort . "
" and by doing so , monsieur the governor , " said dartagnan , " you will deserve well of the cardinal . "
" shall you see him on your return , monsieur count ? "
" without a doubt . "
" tell him , i beg you , that i am his humble servant . "
" i will not fail . "
delighted with this assurance the governor countersigned the passport and delivered it to dartagnan .
dartagnan lost no time in useless compliments . he thanked the governor , bowed , and departed .
once outside , he and planchet set off as fast as they could ; and by making a long detour avoided the wood and reentered the city by another gate .
the vessel was quite ready to sail , and the captain was waiting on the wharf .
" well ? " said he , on perceiving dartagnan .
" here is my pass countersigned , " said the latter .
" and that other gentleman ?
" he will not go today , " said dartagnan ; " but here , i ll pay you for us two . "
" in that case let us go , " said the shipmaster .
" let us go , " repeated dartagnan .
he leaped with planchet into the boat , and five minutes after they were on board .
it was time ; for they had scarcely sailed half a league , when dartagnan saw a flash and heard a detonation .
it was the cannon which announced the closing of the port .
he had now leisure to look to his wound . fortunately , as dartagnan had thought , it was not dangerous .
still further , his shirt had stuck to the wound , and he had lost only a few drops of blood .
dartagnan was worn out with fatigue . a mattress was laid upon the deck for him .
he threw himself upon it , and fell asleep .
the duke was at windsor hunting with the king .
dartagnan inquired for the confidential valet of the duke , who , having accompanied him in all his voyages , spoke french perfectly well ; he told him that he came from paris on an affair of life and death , and that he must speak with his master instantly .
the confidence with which dartagnan spoke convinced patrick , which was the name of this minister of the minister .
he ordered two horses to be saddled , and himself went as guide to the young guardsman .
as for planchet , he had been lifted from his horse as stiff as a rush ; the poor lad s strength was almost exhausted . dartagnan seemed iron .
on their arrival at the castle they learned that buckingham and the king were hawking in the marshes two or three leagues away .
in twenty minutes they were on the spot named .
patrick soon caught the sound of his master s voice calling his falcon .
" whom must i announce to my lord duke ? " asked patrick .
" the young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on the pont neuf , opposite the samaritaine . "
" a singular introduction ! "
" you will find that it is as good as another . "
patrick galloped off , reached the duke , and announced to him in the terms directed that a messenger awaited him .
buckingham at once remembered the circumstance , and suspecting that something was going on in france of which it was necessary he should be informed , he only took the time to inquire where the messenger was , and recognizing from afar the uniform of the guards , he put his horse into a gallop , and rode straight up to dartagnan .
patrick discreetly kept in the background .
" no misfortune has happened to the queen ? " cried buckingham , the instant he came up , throwing all his fear and love into the question .
" i believe not ; nevertheless i believe she runs some great peril from which your grace alone can extricate her . "
" i ! " cried buckingham .
" what is it ? i should be too happy to be of any service to her .
speak , speak ! "
" take this letter , " said dartagnan .
" this letter ! from whom comes this letter ? "
" from her majesty , as i think . "
" from her majesty ! " said buckingham , becoming so pale that dartagnan feared he would faint as he broke the seal .
" what is this rent ? " said he , showing dartagnan a place where it had been pierced through .
" ah , " said dartagnan , " i did not see that ; it was the sword of the comte de wardes which made that hole , when he gave me a good thrust in the breast . "
" you are wounded ? " asked buckingham , as he opened the letter .
" oh , nothing but a scratch , " said dartagnan .
" just heaven , what have i read ? " cried the duke .
" patrick , remain here , or rather join the king , wherever he may be , and tell his majesty that i humbly beg him to excuse me , but an affair of the greatest importance recalls me to london .
come , monsieur , come ! " and both set off towards the capital at full gallop .
21 the countess de winter
by adding all that he heard from the mouth of the young man to his own remembrances , he was enabled to form a pretty exact idea of a position of the seriousness of which , for the rest , the queen s letter , short but explicit , gave him the clue .
but that which astonished him most was that the cardinal , so deeply interested in preventing this young man from setting his foot in england , had not succeeded in arresting him on the road .
it was then , upon the manifestation of this astonishment , that dartagnan related to him the precaution taken , and how , thanks to the devotion of his three friends , whom he had left scattered and bleeding on the road , he had succeeded in coming off with a single sword thrust , which had pierced the queen s letter and for which he had repaid m. de wardes with such terrible coin .
while he was listening to this recital , delivered with the greatest simplicity , the duke looked from time to time at the young man with astonishment , as if he could not comprehend how so much prudence , courage , and devotedness could be allied with a countenance which indicated not more than twenty years .
the horses went like the wind , and in a few minutes they were at the gates of london .
dartagnan imagined that on arriving in town the duke would slacken his pace , but it was not so . he kept on his way at the same rate , heedless about upsetting those whom he met on the road .
in fact , in crossing the city two or three accidents of this kind happened ; but buckingham did not even turn his head to see what became of those he had knocked down . dartagnan followed him amid cries which strongly resembled curses .
on entering the court of his hotel , buckingham sprang from his horse , and without thinking what became of the animal , threw the bridle on his neck , and sprang toward the vestibule .
dartagnan did the same , with a little more concern , however , for the noble creatures , whose merits he fully appreciated ; but he had the satisfaction of seeing three or four grooms run from the kitchens and the stables , and busy themselves with the steeds .
the duke walked so fast that dartagnan had some trouble in keeping up with him .
he passed through several apartments , of an elegance of which even the greatest nobles of france had not even an idea , and arrived at length in a bedchamber which was at once a miracle of taste and of richness .
in the alcove of this chamber was a door concealed in the tapestry which the duke opened with a little gold key which he wore suspended from his neck by a chain of the same metal .
with discretion dartagnan remained behind ; but at the moment when buckingham crossed the threshold , he turned round , and seeing the hesitation of the young man , " come in ! " cried he , " and if you have the good fortune to be admitted to her majesty s presence , tell her what you have seen . "
encouraged by this invitation , dartagnan followed the duke , who closed the door after them .
the two found themselves in a small chapel covered with a tapestry of persian silk worked with gold , and brilliantly lighted with a vast number of candles .
over a species of altar , and beneath a canopy of blue velvet , surmounted by white and red plumes , was a full - length portrait of anne of austria , so perfect in its resemblance that dartagnan uttered a cry of surprise on beholding it . one might believe the queen was about to speak .
on the altar , and beneath the portrait , was the casket containing the diamond studs .
the duke approached the altar , knelt as a priest might have done before a crucifix , and opened the casket .
" there , " said he , drawing from the casket a large bow of blue ribbon all sparkling with diamonds , " there are the precious studs which i have taken an oath should be buried with me .
the queen gave them to me , the queen requires them again . her will be done , like that of god , in all things . "
then , he began to kiss , one after the other , those dear studs with which he was about to part .
all at once he uttered a terrible cry .
" what is the matter ? " exclaimed dartagnan , anxiously ; " what has happened to you , my lord ? "
" all is lost ! " cried buckingham , becoming as pale as a corpse ; " two of the studs are wanting , there are only ten . "
" can you have lost them , my lord , or do you think they have been stolen ? "
" they have been stolen , " replied the duke , " and it is the cardinal who has dealt this blow .
hold ; see ! the ribbons which held them have been cut with scissors . "
" if my lord suspects they have been stolen , perhaps the person who stole them still has them in his hands . "
" wait , wait ! " said the duke .
" the only time i have worn these studs was at a ball given by the king eight days ago at windsor .
the comtesse de winter , with whom i had quarreled , became reconciled to me at that ball .
that reconciliation was nothing but the vengeance of a jealous woman .
i have never seen her from that day .
the woman is an agent of the cardinal . "
" he has agents , then , throughout the world ? " cried dartagnan .
" oh , yes , " said buckingham , grating his teeth with rage . " yes , he is a terrible antagonist .
but when is this ball to take place ? "
" monday next . "
" monday next ! still five days before us . that s more time than we want .
patrick ! " cried the duke , opening the door of the chapel , " patrick ! "
his confidential valet appeared .
" my jeweler and my secretary . "
the valet went out with a mute promptitude which showed him accustomed to obey blindly and without reply .
but although the jeweler had been mentioned first , it was the secretary who first made his appearance .
this was simply because he lived in the hotel .
he found buckingham seated at a table in his bedchamber , writing orders with his own hand .
" mr . jackson , " said he , " go instantly to the lord chancellor , and tell him that i charge him with the execution of these orders .
i wish them to be promulgated immediately . "
" but , my lord , if the lord chancellor interrogates me upon the motives which may have led your grace to adopt such an extraordinary measure , what shall i reply ? "
" that such is my pleasure , and that i answer for my will to no man . "
" will that be the answer , " replied the secretary , smiling , " which he must transmit to his majesty if , by chance , his majesty should have the curiosity to know why no vessel is to leave any of the ports of great britain ? "
" you are right , mr . jackson , " replied buckingham . " he will say , in that case , to the king that i am determined on war , and that this measure is my first act of hostility against france . "
the secretary bowed and retired .
" we are safe on that side , " said buckingham , turning toward dartagnan .
" if the studs are not yet gone to paris , they will not arrive till after you . "
" how so ? "
dartagnan looked with stupefaction at a man who thus employed the unlimited power with which he was clothed by the confidence of a king in the prosecution of his intrigues .
buckingham saw by the expression of the young man s face what was passing in his mind , and he smiled .
" yes , " said he , " yes , anne of austria is my true queen . upon a word from her , i would betray my country , i would betray my king , i would betray my god .
dartagnan was amazed to note by what fragile and unknown threads the destinies of nations and the lives of men are suspended .
he was lost in these reflections when the goldsmith entered . he was an irishman -- one of the most skillful of his craft , and who himself confessed that he gained a hundred thousand livres a year by the duke of buckingham .
" mr . oreilly , " said the duke , leading him into the chapel , " look at these diamond studs , and tell me what they are worth apiece . "
the goldsmith cast a glance at the elegant manner in which they were set , calculated , one with another , what the diamonds were worth , and without hesitation said , " fifteen hundred pistoles each , my lord . "
" how many days would it require to make two studs exactly like them ?
you see there are two wanting . "
" eight days , my lord . "
" i will give you three thousand pistoles apiece if i can have them by the day after tomorrow . "
" my lord , they shall be yours . "
" you are a jewel of a man , mr . oreilly ; but that is not all . these studs can not be trusted to anybody ; it must be done in the palace . "
" impossible , my lord ! there is no one but myself can so execute them that one can not tell the new from the old . "
" therefore , my dear mr . oreilly , you are my prisoner . and if you wish ever to leave my palace , you can not ; so make the best of it .
he knew all objection would be useless , and instantly determined how to act . " may i be permitted to inform my wife ? " said he .
" oh , you may even see her if you like , my dear mr . oreilly .
dartagnan could not get over the surprise created in him by this minister , who thus open - handed , sported with men and millions .
as to the goldsmith , he wrote to his wife , sending her the order for the thousand pistoles , and charging her to send him , in exchange , his most skillful apprentice , an assortment of diamonds , of which he gave the names and the weight , and the necessary tools .
buckingham conducted the goldsmith to the chamber destined for him , and which , at the end of half an hour , was transformed into a workshop .
then he placed a sentinel at each door , with an order to admit nobody upon any pretense but his valet de chambre , patrick .
we need not add that the goldsmith , oreilly , and his assistant , were prohibited from going out under any pretext .
this point , settled , the duke turned to dartagnan .
" now , my young friend , " said he , " england is all our own . what do you wish for ? what do you desire ? "
" a bed , my lord , " replied dartagnan . " at present , i confess , that is the thing i stand most in need of . "
buckingham gave dartagnan a chamber adjoining his own .
in one hour after , the ordinance was published in london that no vessel bound for france should leave port , not even the packet boat with letters .
in the eyes of everybody this was a declaration of war between the two kingdoms .
on the day after the morrow , by eleven oclock , the two diamond studs were finished , and they were so completely imitated , so perfectly alike , that buckingham could not tell the new ones from the old ones , and experts in such matters would have been deceived as he was .
he immediately called dartagnan .
but does your grace mean to give me the studs without the casket ? "
" the casket would encumber you .
besides , the casket is the more precious from being all that is left to me .
you will say that i keep it . "
" i will perform your commission , word for word , my lord . "
" and now , " resumed buckingham , looking earnestly at the young man , " how shall i ever acquit myself of the debt i owe you ? "
dartagnan blushed up to the whites of his eyes .
he saw that the duke was searching for a means of making him accept something and the idea that the blood of his friends and himself was about to be paid for with english gold was strangely repugnant to him .
" let us understand each other , my lord , " replied dartagnan , " and let us make things clear beforehand in order that there may be no mistake .
i am in the service of the king and queen of france , and form part of the company of monsieur dessessart , who , as well as his brother - in - law , monsieur de treville , is particularly attached to their majesties .
what i have done , then , has been for the queen , and not at all for your grace .
and still further , it is very probable i should not have done anything of this , if it had not been to make myself agreeable to someone who is my lady , as the queen is yours . "
" yes , " said the duke , smiling , " and i even believe that i know that other person ; it is-- "
" my lord , i have not named her ! " interrupted the young man , warmly .
" that is true , " said the duke ; " and it is to this person i am bound to discharge my debt of gratitude . "
" we say ,  proud as a scotsman ,  " murmured the duke of buckingham .
" and we say ,  proud as a gascon ,  " replied dartagnan .
" the gascons are the scots of france . "
dartagnan bowed to the duke , and was retiring .
" well , are you going away in that manner ?
where , and how ? "
" that s true ! "
" fore gad , these frenchmen have no consideration ! "
" i had forgotten that england was an island , and that you were the king of it . "
" go to the riverside , ask for the brig sund , and give this letter to the captain ; he will convey you to a little port , where certainly you are not expected , and which is ordinarily only frequented by fishermen . "
" the name of that port ? "
" st . valery ; but listen . when you have arrived there you will go to a mean tavern , without a name and without a sign -- a mere fisherman s hut . you can not be mistaken ; there is but one . "
" afterward ? "
" you will ask for the host , and will repeat to him the word  forward !  "
" which means ? "
" in french , en avant . it is the password .
these horses are equipped for the field .
however proud you may be , you will not refuse to accept one of them , and to request your three companions to accept the others -- that is , in order to make war against us .
besides , the end justified the means , as you frenchmen say , does it not ? "
" yes , my lord , i accept them , " said dartagnan ; " and if it please god , we will make a good use of your presents . "
" well , now , your hand , young man . perhaps we shall soon meet on the field of battle ; but in the meantime we shall part good friends , i hope . "
" yes , my lord ; but with the hope of soon becoming enemies . "
" be satisfied ; i promise you that . "
" i depend upon your word , my lord . "
dartagnan bowed to the duke , and made his way as quickly as possible to the riverside .
fifty vessels were waiting to set out .
the next day about nine oclock in the morning , he landed at st . valery .
dartagnan went instantly in search of the inn , and easily discovered it by the riotous noise which resounded from it . war between england and france was talked of as near and certain , and the jolly sailors were having a carousal .
dartagnan made his way through the crowd , advanced toward the host , and pronounced the word " forward ! "
the host instantly made him a sign to follow , went out with him by a door which opened into a yard , led him to the stable , where a saddled horse awaited him , and asked him if he stood in need of anything else .
" i want to know the route i am to follow , " said dartagnan .
" go from hence to blangy , and from blangy to neufchatel .
at neufchatel , go to the tavern of the golden harrow , give the password to the landlord , and you will find , as you have here , a horse ready saddled . "
" have i anything to pay ? " demanded dartagnan .
" everything is paid , " replied the host , " and liberally .
begone , and may god guide you ! "
" amen ! " cried the young man , and set off at full gallop .
he strictly followed the instructions he had received .
at neufchatel , as at st . valery , he found a horse quite ready and awaiting him . he was about to remove the pistols from the saddle he had quit to the one he was about to fill , but he found the holsters furnished with similar pistols .
" your address at paris ? "
" hotel of the guards , company of dessessart . "
" enough , " replied the questioner .
" which route must i take ? " demanded dartagnan , in his turn .
" that of rouen ; but you will leave the city on your right .
you must stop at the little village of eccuis , in which there is but one tavern -- the shield of france .
do nt condemn it from appearances ; you will find a horse in the stables quite as good as this . "
" the same password ? "
" exactly . "
" adieu , master ! "
" a good journey , gentlemen ! do you want anything ? "
dartagnan shook his head , and set off at full speed .
at eccuis , the same scene was repeated . he found as provident a host and a fresh horse . he left his address as he had done before , and set off again at the same pace for pontoise .
at pontoise he changed his horse for the last time , and at nine oclock galloped into the yard of treville s hotel .
he had made nearly sixty leagues in little more than twelve hours .
m de treville received him as if he had seen him that same morning ; only , when pressing his hand a little more warmly than usual , he informed him that the company of dessessart was on duty at the louvre , and that he might repair at once to his post .
22 the ballet of la merlaison
on the morrow , nothing was talked of in paris but the ball which the aldermen of the city were to give to the king and queen , and in which their majesties were to dance the famous la merlaison -- the favorite ballet of the king .
eight days had been occupied in preparations at the hotel de ville for this important evening .
at ten oclock in the morning the sieur de la coste , ensign in the king s guards , followed by two officers and several archers of that body , came to the city registrar , named clement , and demanded of him all the keys of the rooms and offices of the hotel .
these keys were given up to him instantly . each of them had ticket attached to it , by which it might be recognized ; and from that moment the sieur de la coste was charged with the care of all the doors and all the avenues .
at eleven oclock came in his turn duhallier , captain of the guards , bringing with him fifty archers , who were distributed immediately through the hotel de ville , at the doors assigned them .
at three oclock came two companies of the guards , one french , the other swiss .
the company of french guards was composed of half of m. duhallier s men and half of m. dessessart s men .
at six in the evening the guests began to come .
as fast as they entered , they were placed in the grand saloon , on the platforms prepared for them .
at nine oclock madame la premiere presidente arrived .
as next to the queen , she was the most considerable personage of the fete , she was received by the city officials , and placed in a box opposite to that which the queen was to occupy .
at ten oclock , the king s collation , consisting of preserves and other delicacies , was prepared in the little room on the side of the church of st . jean , in front of the silver buffet of the city , which was guarded by four archers .
at midnight great cries and loud acclamations were heard . it was the king , who was passing through the streets which led from the louvre to the hotel de ville , and which were all illuminated with colored lanterns .
immediately the aldermen , clothed in their cloth robes and preceded by six sergeants , each holding a flambeau in his hand , went to attend upon the king , whom they met on the steps , where the provost of the merchants made him the speech of welcome -- a compliment to which his majesty replied with an apology for coming so late , laying the blame upon the cardinal , who had detained him till eleven oclock , talking of affairs of state .
everybody noticed that the king looked dull and preoccupied .
a private room had been prepared for the king and another for monsieur .
in each of these closets were placed masquerade dresses .
the same had been done for the queen and madame the president .
the nobles and ladies of their majesties  suites were to dress , two by two , in chambers prepared for the purpose .
before entering his closet the king desired to be informed the moment the cardinal arrived .
half an hour after the entrance of the king , fresh acclamations were heard ; these announced the arrival of the queen . the aldermen did as they had done before , and preceded by their sergeants , advanced to receive their illustrious guest .
the queen entered the great hall ; and it was remarked that , like the king , she looked dull and even weary .
at the moment she entered , the curtain of a small gallery which to that time had been closed , was drawn , and the pale face of the cardinal appeared , he being dressed as a spanish cavalier .
his eyes were fixed upon those of the queen , and a smile of terrible joy passed over his lips ; the queen did not wear her diamond studs .
the queen remained for a short time to receive the compliments of the city dignitaries and to reply to the salutations of the ladies .
all at once the king appeared with the cardinal at one of the doors of the hall .
the cardinal was speaking to him in a low voice , and the king was very pale .
the queen cast a glance around her , and saw the cardinal behind , with a diabolical smile on his countenance .
" sire , " replied the queen , with a faltering voice , " because , in the midst of such a crowd as this , i feared some accident might happen to them . "
" and you were wrong , madame .
if i made you that present it was that you might adorn yourself therewith .
i tell you that you were wrong . "
the voice of the king was tremulous with anger . everybody looked and listened with astonishment , comprehending nothing of what passed .
" sire , " said the queen , " i can send for them to the louvre , where they are , and thus your majesty s wishes will be complied with . "
" do so , madame , do so , and that at once ; for within an hour the ballet will commence . "
the queen bent in token of submission , and followed the ladies who were to conduct her to her room .
on his part the king returned to his apartment .
there was a moment of trouble and confusion in the assembly .
everybody had remarked that something had passed between the king and queen ; but both of them had spoken so low that everybody , out of respect , withdrew several steps , so that nobody had heard anything .
the violins began to sound with all their might , but nobody listened to them .
the king came out first from his room . he was in a most elegant hunting costume ; and monsieur and the other nobles were dressed like him .
this was the costume that best became the king . so dressed , he really appeared the first gentleman of his kingdom .
the cardinal drew near to the king , and placed in his hand a small casket .
the king opened it , and found in it two diamond studs .
" what does this mean ? " demanded he of the cardinal .
" nothing , " replied the latter ; " only , if the queen has the studs , which i very much doubt , count them , sire , and if you only find ten , ask her majesty who can have stolen from her the two studs that are here . "
the king looked at the cardinal as if to interrogate him ; but he had not time to address any question to him -- a cry of admiration burst from every mouth .
if the king appeared to be the first gentleman of his kingdom , the queen was without doubt the most beautiful woman in france .
it is true that the habit of a huntress became her admirably . she wore a beaver hat with blue feathers , a surtout of gray - pearl velvet , fastened with diamond clasps , and a petticoat of blue satin , embroidered with silver .
on her left shoulder sparkled the diamond studs , on a bow of the same color as the plumes and the petticoat .
the king trembled with joy and the cardinal with vexation ; although , distant as they were from the queen , they could not count the studs . the queen had them . the only question was , had she ten or twelve ?
at that moment the violins sounded the signal for the ballet .
the king advanced toward madame the president , with whom he was to dance , and his highness monsieur with the queen .
they took their places , and the ballet began .
the king danced facing the queen , and every time he passed by her , he devoured with his eyes those studs of which he could not ascertain the number .
a cold sweat covered the brow of the cardinal .
the ballet lasted an hour , and had sixteen entrees .
the ballet ended amid the applause of the whole assemblage , and everyone reconducted his lady to her place ; but the king took advantage of the privilege he had of leaving his lady , to advance eagerly toward the queen .
" i thank you , madame , " said he , " for the deference you have shown to my wishes , but i think you want two of the studs , and i bring them back to you . "
with these words he held out to the queen the two studs the cardinal had given him .
" how , sire ? " cried the young queen , affecting surprise , " you are giving me , then , two more : i shall have fourteen . "
in fact the king counted them , and the twelve studs were all on her majesty s shoulder .
the king called the cardinal .
" what does this mean , monsieur cardinal ? " asked the king in a severe tone .
" and i am the more grateful to your eminence , " replied anne of austria , with a smile that proved she was not the dupe of this ingenious gallantry , " from being certain that these two studs alone have cost you as much as all the others cost his majesty . "
then saluting the king and the cardinal , the queen resumed her way to the chamber in which she had dressed , and where she was to take off her costume .
the attention which we have been obliged to give , during the commencement of the chapter , to the illustrious personages we have introduced into it , has diverted us for an instant from him to whom anne of austria owed the extraordinary triumph she had obtained over the cardinal ; and who , confounded , unknown , lost in the crowd gathered at one of the doors , looked on at this scene , comprehensible only to four persons -- the king , the queen , his eminence , and himself .
the queen had just regained her chamber , and dartagnan was about to retire , when he felt his shoulder lightly touched . he turned and saw a young woman , who made him a sign to follow her .
the face of this young woman was covered with a black velvet mask ; but notwithstanding this precaution , which was in fact taken rather against others than against him , he at once recognized his usual guide , the light and intelligent mme . bonacieux .
the haste which the young woman was in to convey to the queen the excellent news of the happy return of her messenger prevented the two lovers from exchanging more than a few words .
dartagnan therefore followed mme . bonacieux moved by a double sentiment -- love and curiosity .
there she made a fresh sign of silence , and opened a second door concealed by tapestry . the opening of this door disclosed a brilliant light , and she disappeared .
dartagnan remained for a moment motionless , asking himself where he could be ; but soon a ray of light which penetrated through the chamber , together with the warm and perfumed air which reached him from the same aperture , the conversation of two of three ladies in language at once respectful and refined , and the word " majesty " several times repeated , indicated clearly that he was in a closet attached to the queen s apartment .
the young man waited in comparative darkness and listened .
the queen appeared cheerful and happy , which seemed to astonish the persons who surrounded her and who were accustomed to see her almost always sad and full of care .
the queen attributed this joyous feeling to the beauty of the fete , to the pleasure she had experienced in the ballet ; and as it is not permissible to contradict a queen , whether she smile or weep , everybody expatiated on the gallantry of the aldermen of the city of paris .
although dartagnan did not at all know the queen , he soon distinguished her voice from the others , at first by a slightly foreign accent , and next by that tone of domination naturally impressed upon all royal words .
he heard her approach and withdraw from the partially open door ; and twice or three times he even saw the shadow of a person intercept the light .
he cast himself on his knees , seized the hand , and touched it respectfully with his lips .
then the hand was withdrawn , leaving in his an object which he perceived to be a ring .
" you at last ? " cried dartagnan .
" silence ! " said the young woman , placing her hand upon his lips ; " silence , and go the same way you came ! "
" but where and when shall i see you again ? " cried dartagnan .
" a note which you will find at home will tell you .
begone , begone ! "
at these words she opened the door of the corridor , and pushed dartagnan out of the room .
dartagnan obeyed like a child , without the least resistance or objection , which proved that he was really in love .
23 the rendezvous
dartagnan ran home immediately , and although it was three oclock in the morning and he had some of the worst quarters of paris to traverse , he met with no misadventure .
everyone knows that drunkards and lovers have a protecting deity .
he found the door of his passage open , sprang up the stairs and knocked softly in a manner agreed upon between him and his lackey .
planchet * , whom he had sent home two hours before from the hotel de ville , telling him to sit up for him , opened the door for him .
in the intervening time buckingham perhaps sent him to paris , as he did the horses .
" what do you mean , blockhead ? "
" i mean to say that when i came in , although i had the key of your apartment in my pocket , and that key had never quit me , i found a letter on the green table cover in your bedroom . "
" and where is that letter ? "
" i left it where i found it , monsieur .
it is not natural for letters to enter people s houses in this manner .
if the window had been open or even ajar , i should think nothing of it ; but , no -- all was hermetically sealed .
beware , monsieur ; there is certainly some magic underneath . "
meanwhile , the young man had darted in to his chamber , and opened the letter . it was from mme . bonacieux , and was expressed in these terms :
while reading this letter , dartagnan felt his heart dilated and compressed by that delicious spasm which tortures and caresses the hearts of lovers .
it was the first billet he had received ; it was the first rendezvous that had been granted him .
his heart , swelled by the intoxication of joy , felt ready to dissolve away at the very gate of that terrestrial paradise called love !
" well , monsieur , " said planchet , who had observed his master grow red and pale successively , " did i not guess truly ? is it not some bad affair ? "
" you are mistaken , planchet , " replied dartagnan ; " and as a proof , there is a crown to drink my health . "
" fall from heaven , my friend , fall from heaven . "
" then monsieur is satisfied ? " asked planchet .
" my dear planchet , i am the happiest of men ! "
" and i may profit by monsieur s happiness , and go to bed ? "
" yes , go . "
" may the blessings of heaven fall upon monsieur ! but it is not the less true that that letter-- "
and planchet retired , shaking his head with an air of doubt , which the liberality of dartagnan had not entirely effaced .
left alone , dartagnan read and reread his billet . then he kissed and rekissed twenty times the lines traced by the hand of his beautiful mistress .
at length he went to bed , fell asleep , and had golden dreams .
at seven oclock in the morning he arose and called planchet , who at the second summons opened the door , his countenance not yet quite freed from the anxiety of the preceding night .
" planchet , " said dartagnan , " i am going out for all day , perhaps . you are , therefore , your own master till seven oclock in the evening ; but at seven oclock you must hold yourself in readiness with two horses . "
" there ! " said planchet . " we are going again , it appears , to have our hides pierced in all sorts of ways . "
" you will take your musketoon and your pistols . "
" there , now ! did nt i say so ? " cried planchet .
" i was sure of it -- the cursed letter ! "
" do nt be afraid , you idiot ; there is nothing in hand but a party of pleasure . "
" ah , like the charming journey the other day , when it rained bullets and produced a crop of steel traps ! "
" well , if you are really afraid , monsieur planchet , " resumed dartagnan , " i will go without you . i prefer traveling alone to having a companion who entertains the least fear . "
" monsieur does me wrong , " said planchet ; " i thought he had seen me at work . "
" yes , but i thought perhaps you had worn out all your courage the first time . "
" monsieur shall see that upon occasion i have some left ; only i beg monsieur not to be too prodigal of it if he wishes it to last long . "
" do you believe you have still a certain amount of it to expend this evening ? "
" i hope so , monsieur . "
" well , then , i count on you . "
" at the appointed hour i shall be ready ; only i believed that monsieur had but one horse in the guard stables . "
" perhaps there is but one at this moment ; but by this evening there will be four . "
" it appears that our journey was a remounting journey , then ? "
" exactly so , " said dartagnan ; and nodding to planchet , he went out .
m bonacieux was at his door .
dartagnan s intention was to go out without speaking to the worthy mercer ; but the latter made so polite and friendly a salutation that his tenant felt obliged , not only to stop , but to enter into conversation with him .
besides , how is it possible to avoid a little condescension toward a husband whose pretty wife has appointed a meeting with you that same evening at st . cloud , opposite destrees s pavilion ?
dartagnan approached him with the most amiable air he could assume .
the conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of the poor man .
m. bonacieux , who was ignorant that dartagnan had overheard his conversation with the stranger of meung , related to his young tenant the persecutions of that monster , m. de laffemas , whom he never ceased to designate , during his account , by the title of the " cardinal s executioner , " and expatiated at great length upon the bastille , the bolts , the wickets , the dungeons , the gratings , the instruments of torture .
" ah ! " said bonacieux , " they took good care not to tell me that ; and my wife , on her part , has sworn to me by all that s sacred that she does not know .
" you are right , my dear monsieur bonacieux , my friends and i have been on a little journey . " " far from here ? "
" oh , lord , no !
about forty leagues only . we went to take monsieur athos to the waters of forges , where my friends still remain . "
" and you have returned , have you not ? " replied m. bonacieux , giving to his countenance a most sly air .
" a handsome young fellow like you does not obtain long leaves of absence from his mistress ; and we were impatiently waited for at paris , were we not ? "
" my faith ! " said the young man , laughing , " i confess it , and so much more the readily , my dear bonacieux , as i see there is no concealing anything from you .
yes , i was expected , and very impatiently , i acknowledge . "
a slight shade passed over the brow of bonacieux , but so slight that dartagnan did not perceive it .
" and we are going to be recompensed for our diligence ? " continued the mercer , with a trifling alteration in his voice -- so trifling , indeed , that dartagnan did not perceive it any more than he had the momentary shade which , an instant before , had darkened the countenance of the worthy man .
" ah , may you be a true prophet ! " said dartagnan , laughing .
" no ; what i say , " replied bonacieux , " is only that i may know whether i am delaying you . "
" why that question , my dear host ? " asked dartagnan . " do you intend to sit up for me ? "
" no ; but since my arrest and the robbery that was committed in my house , i am alarmed every time i hear a door open , particularly in the night .
what the deuce can you expect ? i am no swordsman . "
" well , do nt be alarmed if i return at one , two or three oclock in the morning ; indeed , do not be alarmed if i do not come at all . "
this time bonacieux became so pale that dartagnan could not help perceiving it , and asked him what was the matter .
" nothing , " replied bonacieux , " nothing .
since my misfortunes i have been subject to faintnesses , which seize me all at once , and i have just felt a cold shiver .
pay no attention to it ; you have nothing to occupy yourself with but being happy . "
" not yet ; wait a little ! this evening , you said . "
" madame bonacieux is not at liberty this evening , " replied the husband , seriously ; " she is detained at the louvre this evening by her duties . "
" so much the worse for you , my dear host , so much the worse ! when i am happy , i wish all the world to be so ; but it appears that is not possible . "
the young man departed , laughing at the joke , which he thought he alone could comprehend .
" amuse yourself well ! " replied bonacieux , in a sepulchral tone .
but dartagnan was too far off to hear him ; and if he had heard him in the disposition of mind he then enjoyed , he certainly would not have remarked it .
he took his way toward the hotel of m. de treville ; his visit of the day before , it is to be remembered , had been very short and very little explicative .
he found treville in a joyful mood .
he had thought the king and queen charming at the ball .
it is true the cardinal had been particularly ill - tempered .
he had retired at one oclock under the pretense of being indisposed .
as to their majesties , they did not return to the louvre till six oclock in the morning .
" now , " said treville , lowering his voice , and looking into every corner of the apartment to see if they were alone , " now let us talk about yourself , my young friend ; for it is evident that your happy return has something to do with the joy of the king , the triumph of the queen , and the humiliation of his eminence .
you must look out for yourself . "
" what have i to fear , " replied dartagnan , " as long as i shall have the luck to enjoy the favor of their majesties ? "
" everything , believe me .
" do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself , and knows that i have been to london ? "
" the devil ! you have been to london !
was it from london you brought that beautiful diamond that glitters on your finger ?
beware , my dear dartagnan ! a present from an enemy is not a good thing . are there not some latin verses upon that subject ?
stop ! "
" yes , doubtless , " replied dartagnan , who had never been able to cram the first rudiments of that language into his head , and who had by his ignorance driven his master to despair , " yes , doubtless there is one . "
" there certainly is one , " said m. de treville , who had a tincture of literature , " and monsieur de benserade was quoting it to me the other day .
stop a minute -- ah , this is it :  timeo danaos et dona ferentes ,  which means ,  beware of the enemy who makes you presents . "
" this diamond does not come from an enemy , monsieur , " replied dartagnan , " it comes from the queen . "
" from the queen ! oh , oh ! " said m. de treville .
" why , it is indeed a true royal jewel , which is worth a thousand pistoles if it is worth a denier .
by whom did the queen send you this jewel ? "
" she gave it to me herself . "
" where ? "
" in the room adjoining the chamber in which she changed her toilet . "
" how ? "
" giving me her hand to kiss . "
" you have kissed the queen s hand ? " said m. de treville , looking earnestly at dartagnan .
" her majesty did me the honor to grant me that favor . "
" and that in the presence of witnesses !
imprudent , thrice imprudent ! "
" i know them by their romantic imagination . everything that savors of mystery charms them .
" no ; but thanks to this diamond , " replied the young man .
" listen , " said m. de treville ; " shall i give you counsel , good counsel , the counsel of a friend ? "
" you will do me honor , monsieur , " said dartagnan .
pistoles have no name , young man , and that ring has a terrible one , which may betray him who wears it . "
" sell this ring , a ring which comes from my sovereign ? never ! " said dartagnan .
" then , at least turn the gem inside , you silly fellow ; for everybody must be aware that a cadet from gascony does not find such stones in his mother s jewel case . "
" you think , then , i have something to dread ? " asked dartagnan .
" i mean to say , young man , that he who sleeps over a mine the match of which is already lighted , may consider himself in safety in comparison with you . "
" the devil ! " said dartagnan , whom the positive tone of m. de treville began to disquiet , " the devil !
what must i do ? " " above all things be always on your guard .
the cardinal has a tenacious memory and a long arm ; you may depend upon it , he will repay you by some ill turn . "
" but of what sort ? "
" eh ! how can i tell ? has he not all the tricks of a demon at his command ?
the least that can be expected is that you will be arrested . "
" what ! will they dare to arrest a man in his majesty s service ? " " pardieu !
they did not scruple much in the case of athos .
if anyone seeks a quarrel with you , shun it , were it with a child of ten years old .
dartagnan blushed .
" my mistress above all , " repeated he , mechanically ; " and why her rather than another ? "
" because a mistress is one of the cardinal s favorite means ; he has not one that is more expeditious . a woman will sell you for ten pistoles , witness delilah .
you are acquainted with the scriptures ? "
dartagnan thought of the appointment mme . bonacieux had made with him for that very evening ; but we are bound to say , to the credit of our hero , that the bad opinion entertained by m. de treville of women in general , did not inspire him with the least suspicion of his pretty hostess .
" but , a propos , " resumed m. de treville , " what has become of your three companions ? "
" i was about to ask you if you had heard any news of them ? "
" none , monsieur . "
" well , i left them on my road -- porthos at chantilly , with a duel on his hands ; aramis at crevecoeur , with a ball in his shoulder ; and athos at amiens , detained by an accusation of coining . "
" see there , now ! " said m. de treville ; " and how the devil did you escape ? "
" by a miracle , monsieur , i must acknowledge , with a sword thrust in my breast , and by nailing the comte de wardes on the byroad to calais , like a butterfly on a tapestry . "
" there again ! de wardes , one of the cardinal s men , a cousin of rochefort !
stop , my friend , i have an idea . "
" speak , monsieur . "
" in your place , i would do one thing . "
" what ? "
" while his eminence was seeking for me in paris , i would take , without sound of drum or trumpet , the road to picardy , and would go and make some inquiries concerning my three companions .
what the devil ! they merit richly that piece of attention on your part . "
" the advice is good , monsieur , and tomorrow i will set out . "
" tomorrow ! any why not this evening ? "
" this evening , monsieur , i am detained in paris by indispensable business . "
" ah , young man , young man , some flirtation or other .
take my advice and set out this evening . "
" impossible , monsieur . "
" you have given your word , then ? "
" yes , monsieur . "
" ah , that s quite another thing ; but promise me , if you should not be killed tonight , that you will go tomorrow . "
" i promise it . "
" do you need money ? "
" i have still fifty pistoles .
that , i think , is as much as i shall want . "
" but your companions ? "
" i do nt think they can be in need of any .
we left paris , each with seventy - five pistoles in his pocket . "
" shall i see you again before your departure ? "
" i think not , monsieur , unless something new should happen . "
" well , a pleasant journey . "
" thanks , monsieur . "
dartagnan left m. de treville , touched more than ever by his paternal solicitude for his musketeers .
he called successively at the abodes of athos , porthos , and aramis .
neither of them had returned .
their lackeys likewise were absent , and nothing had been heard of either the one or the other .
" why so , planchet ? " asked the young man .
" do you place confidence in our landlord -- monsieur bonacieux ? " " i ?
not the least in the world . "
" oh , you do quite right , monsieur . "
" but why this question ? "
" because , while you were talking with him , i watched you without listening to you ; and , monsieur , his countenance changed color two or three times ! "
" bah ! "
" and you found it ? "
" traitorous , monsieur . "
" indeed ! "
" still more ; as soon as monsieur had left and disappeared round the corner of the street , monsieur bonacieux took his hat , shut his door , and set off at a quick pace in an opposite direction . "
" it seems you are right , planchet ; all this appears to be a little mysterious ; and be assured that we will not pay him our rent until the matter shall be categorically explained to us . "
" monsieur jests , but monsieur will see . "
" what would you have , planchet ? what must come is written . "
" monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening ? "
" then that is monsieur s determination ? "
" undeniably , my friend . at nine oclock , then , be ready here at the hotel , i will come and take you . "
planchet seeing there was no longer any hope of making his master renounce his project , heaved a profound sigh and set to work to groom the third horse .
24 the pavilion
at nine oclock dartagnan was at the hotel des gardes ; he found planchet all ready .
the fourth horse had arrived .
planchet was armed with his musketoon and a pistol .
it was quite dark , and no one saw them go out .
planchet took place behind his master , and kept at a distance of ten paces from him .
dartagnan crossed the quays , went out by the gate of la conference and followed the road , much more beautiful then than it is now , which leads to st . cloud .
in fact , we must not dissemble that the oscillation of the tall trees and the reflection of the moon in the dark underwood gave him serious uneasiness .
" do nt you think , monsieur , that woods are like churches ? "
" how so , planchet ? "
" because we dare not speak aloud in one or the other . "
" but why did you not dare to speak aloud , planchet -- because you are afraid ? "
" afraid of being heard ? yes , monsieur . "
" afraid of being heard !
why , there is nothing improper in our conversation , my dear planchet , and no one could find fault with it . "
" ah , monsieur ! " replied planchet , recurring to his besetting idea , " that monsieur bonacieux has something vicious in his eyebrows , and something very unpleasant in the play of his lips . "
" what the devil makes you think of bonacieux ? "
" monsieur , we think of what we can , and not of what we will . "
" because you are a coward , planchet . "
" monsieur , we must not confound prudence with cowardice ; prudence is a virtue . "
" and you are very virtuous , are you not , planchet ? "
" monsieur , is not that the barrel of a musket which glitters yonder ?
had we not better lower our heads ? "
" in truth , " murmured dartagnan , to whom m. de treville s recommendation recurred , " this animal will end by making me afraid . "
and he put his horse into a trot .
planchet followed the movements of his master as if he had been his shadow , and was soon trotting by his side .
" are we going to continue this pace all night ? " asked planchet .
" no ; you are at your journey s end . "
" how , monsieur ! and you ? "
" i am going a few steps farther . "
" and monsieur leaves me here alone ? "
" you are afraid , planchet ? "
" no ; i only beg leave to observe to monsieur that the night will be very cold , that chills bring on rheumatism , and that a lackey who has the rheumatism makes but a poor servant , particularly to a master as active as monsieur . "
" well , if you are cold , planchet , you can go into one of those cabarets that you see yonder , and be in waiting for me at the door by six oclock in the morning . "
" monsieur , i have eaten and drunk respectfully the crown you gave me this morning , so that i have not a sou left in case i should be cold . "
" here s half a pistole .
tomorrow morning . "
dartagnan sprang from his horse , threw the bridle to planchet , and departed at a quick pace , folding his cloak around him .
in the meantime dartagnan , who had plunged into a bypath , continued his route and reached st . cloud ; but instead of following the main street he turned behind the chateau , reached a sort of retired lane , and found himself soon in front of the pavilion named .
it was situated in a very private spot .
a high wall , at the angle of which was the pavilion , ran along one side of this lane , and on the other was a little garden connected with a poor cottage which was protected by a hedge from passers - by .
he gained the place appointed , and as no signal had been given him by which to announce his presence , he waited .
not the least noise was to be heard ; it might be imagined that he was a hundred miles from the capital .
dartagnan leaned against the hedge , after having cast a glance behind it .
beyond that hedge , that garden , and that cottage , a dark mist enveloped with its folds that immensity where paris slept -- a vast void from which glittered a few luminous points , the funeral stars of that hell !
but for dartagnan all aspects were clothed happily , all ideas wore a smile , all shades were diaphanous .
the appointed hour was about to strike .
in fact , at the end of a few minutes the belfry of st . cloud let fall slowly ten strokes from its sonorous jaws .
through this window shone a mild light which silvered the foliage of two or three linden trees which formed a group outside the park .
wrapped in this sweet idea , dartagnan waited half an hour without the least impatience , his eyes fixed upon that charming little abode of which he could perceive a part of the ceiling with its gilded moldings , attesting the elegance of the rest of the apartment .
the belfry of st . cloud sounded half past ten .
this time , without knowing why , dartagnan felt a cold shiver run through his veins .
perhaps the cold began to affect him , and he took a perfectly physical sensation for a moral impression .
then the idea seized him that he had read incorrectly , and that the appointment was for eleven oclock .
he went and resumed his post , beginning to be rather uneasy at this silence and this solitude .
eleven oclock sounded .
dartagnan began now really to fear that something had happened to mme . bonacieux .
he clapped his hands three times -- the ordinary signal of lovers ; but nobody replied to him , not even an echo .
he then thought , with a touch of vexation , that perhaps the young woman had fallen asleep while waiting for him .
he approached the wall , and tried to climb it ; but the wall had been recently pointed , and dartagnan could get no hold .
at that moment he thought of the trees , upon whose leaves the light still shone ; and as one of them drooped over the road , he thought that from its branches he might get a glimpse of the interior of the pavilion .
the tree was easy to climb .
besides , dartagnan was but twenty years old , and consequently had not yet forgotten his schoolboy habits .
in an instant he was among the branches , and his keen eyes plunged through the transparent panes into the interior of the pavilion .
a table , which had been covered with an elegant supper , was overturned . the decanters broken in pieces , and the fruits crushed , strewed the floor .
everything in the apartment gave evidence of a violent and desperate struggle .
besides , the wheels of a carriage , which appeared to have come from paris , had made a deep impression in the soft earth , which did not extend beyond the pavilion , but turned again toward paris .
at length dartagnan , in pursuing his researches , found near the wall a woman s torn glove .
this glove , wherever it had not touched the muddy ground , was of irreproachable odor .
it was one of those perfumed gloves that lovers like to snatch from a pretty hand .
as dartagnan pursued his investigations , a more abundant and more icy sweat rolled in large drops from his forehead ; his heart was oppressed by a horrible anguish ; his respiration was broken and short . and yet he said , to reassure himself , that this pavilion perhaps had nothing in common with mme . bonacieux ; that the young woman had made an appointment with him before the pavilion , and not in the pavilion ; that she might have been detained in paris by her duties , or perhaps by the jealousy of her husband .
but all these reasons were combated , destroyed , overthrown , by that feeling of intimate pain which , on certain occasions , takes possession of our being , and cries to us so as to be understood unmistakably that some great misfortune is hanging over us .
then dartagnan became almost wild . he ran along the high road , took the path he had before taken , and reaching the ferry , interrogated the boatman .
about seven oclock in the evening , the boatman had taken over a young woman , wrapped in a black mantle , who appeared to be very anxious not to be recognized ; but entirely on account of her precautions , the boatman had paid more attention to her and discovered that she was young and pretty .
there were then , as now , a crowd of young and pretty women who came to st . cloud , and who had reasons for not being seen , and yet dartagnan did not for an instant doubt that it was mme . bonacieux whom the boatman had noticed .
dartagnan took advantage of the lamp which burned in the cabin of the ferryman to read the billet of mme . bonacieux once again , and satisfy himself that he had not been mistaken , that the appointment was at st . cloud and not elsewhere , before the destrees s pavilion and not in another street .
everything conspired to prove to dartagnan that his presentiments had not deceived him , and that a great misfortune had happened .
he again ran back to the chateau . it appeared to him that something might have happened at the pavilion in his absence , and that fresh information awaited him .
the lane was still deserted , and the same calm soft light shone through the window .
dartagnan then thought of that cottage , silent and obscure , which had no doubt seen all , and could tell its tale .
the gate of the enclosure was shut ; but he leaped over the hedge , and in spite of the barking of a chained - up dog , went up to the cabin .
no one answered to his first knocking .
a silence of death reigned in the cabin as in the pavilion ; but as the cabin was his last resource , he knocked again .
it soon appeared to him that he heard a slight noise within -- a timid noise which seemed to tremble lest it should be heard .
then dartagnan ceased knocking , and prayed with an accent so full of anxiety and promises , terror and cajolery , that his voice was of a nature to reassure the most fearful .
at length an old , worm - eaten shutter was opened , or rather pushed ajar , but closed again as soon as the light from a miserable lamp which burned in the corner had shone upon the baldric , sword belt , and pistol pommels of dartagnan .
nevertheless , rapid as the movement had been , dartagnan had had time to get a glimpse of the head of an old man .
has anything particular happened in the neighborhood ?
speak ! "
the window was again opened slowly , and the same face appeared , only it was now still more pale than before .
dartagnan related his story simply , with the omission of names . he told how he had a rendezvous with a young woman before that pavilion , and how , not seeing her come , he had climbed the linden tree , and by the light of the lamp had seen the disorder of the chamber .
the old man listened attentively , making a sign only that it was all so ; and then , when dartagnan had ended , he shook his head with an air that announced nothing good .
" what do you mean ? " cried dartagnan .
" in the name of heaven , explain yourself ! "
" oh ! monsieur , " said the old man , " ask me nothing ; for if i dared tell you what i have seen , certainly no good would befall me . "
" you have , then , seen something ? " replied dartagnan .
" in that case , in the name of heaven , " continued he , throwing him a pistole , " tell me what you have seen , and i will pledge you the word of a gentleman that not one of your words shall escape from my heart . "
the old man read so much truth and so much grief in the face of the young man that he made him a sign to listen , and repeated in a low voice : " it was scarcely nine oclock when i heard a noise in the street , and was wondering what it could be , when on coming to my door , i found that somebody was endeavoring to open it .
as i am very poor and am not afraid of being robbed , i went and opened the gate and saw three men at a few paces from it .
in the shadow was a carriage with two horses , and some saddlehorses .
at these words he threw me a crown , which i picked up , and he took the ladder .
two of the men appeared , bearing the woman in their arms , and carried her to the carriage , into which the little old man got after her .
his two companions were already on horseback .
from that moment i have neither seen nor heard anything . "
dartagnan , entirely overcome by this terrible story , remained motionless and mute , while all the demons of anger and jealousy were howling in his heart .
" but , my good gentleman , " resumed the old man , upon whom this mute despair certainly produced a greater effect than cries and tears would have done , " do not take on so ; they did not kill her , and that s a comfort . "
" can you guess , " said dartagnan , " who was the man who headed this infernal expedition ? "
" i do nt know him . "
" but as you spoke to him you must have seen him . "
" oh , it s a description you want ? "
" exactly so . "
" a tall , dark man , with black mustaches , dark eyes , and the air of a gentleman . "
" that s the man ! " cried dartagnan , " again he , forever he !
he is my demon , apparently .
and the other ? "
" which ? "
" the short one . "
" oh , he was not a gentleman , i ll answer for it ; besides , he did not wear a sword , and the others treated him with small consideration . "
" some lackey , " murmured dartagnan .
" poor woman , poor woman , what have they done with you ? "
" you have promised to be secret , my good monsieur ? " said the old man .
" and i renew my promise . be easy , i am a gentleman .
a gentleman has but his word , and i have given you mine . "
with a heavy heart , dartagnan again bent his way toward the ferry .
sometimes he hoped it could not be mme . bonacieux , and that he should find her next day at the louvre ; sometimes he feared she had had an intrigue with another , who , in a jealous fit , had surprised her and carried her off .
his mind was torn by doubt , grief , and despair .
it was past midnight ; the next thing was to find planchet . dartagnan went successively into all the cabarets in which there was a light , but could not find planchet in any of them .
at the sixth he began to reflect that the search was rather dubious .
dartagnan had appointed six oclock in the morning for his lackey , and wherever he might be , he was right .
he was compelled , then , after having swallowed the contents of his bottle , to pass the time as well as to evade suspicion , to fall into the easiest position in his corner and to sleep , whether well or ill .
dartagnan , be it remembered , was only twenty years old , and at that age sleep has its imprescriptible rights which it imperiously insists upon , even with the saddest hearts .
toward six oclock dartagnan awoke with that uncomfortable feeling which generally accompanies the break of day after a bad night .
he was not long in making his toilet . he examined himself to see if advantage had been taken of his sleep , and having found his diamond ring on his finger , his purse in his pocket , and his pistols in his belt , he rose , paid for his bottle , and went out to try if he could have any better luck in his search after his lackey than he had had the night before . the first thing he perceived through the damp gray mist was honest planchet , who , with the two horses in hand , awaited him at the door of a little blind cabaret , before which dartagnan had passed without even a suspicion of its existence .
25 porthos
m. de treville would doubtless give him good advice as to the whole affair .
besides , as m. de treville saw the queen almost daily , he might be able to draw from her majesty some intelligence of the poor young woman , whom they were doubtless making pay very dearly for her devotedness to her mistress .
m de treville listened to the young man s account with a seriousness which proved that he saw something else in this adventure besides a love affair .
when dartagnan had finished , he said , " hum !
" but what is to be done ? " said dartagnan .
" nothing , absolutely nothing , at present , but quitting paris , as i told you , as soon as possible .
rely on me . "
dartagnan knew that , although a gascon , m. de treville was not in the habit of making promises , and that when by chance he did promise , he more than kept his word .
he bowed to him , then , full of gratitude for the past and for the future ; and the worthy captain , who on his side felt a lively interest in this young man , so brave and so resolute , pressed his hand kindly , wishing him a pleasant journey .
determined to put the advice of m. de treville in practice instantly , dartagnan directed his course toward the rue des fossoyeurs , in order to superintend the packing of his valise .
on approaching the house , he perceived m. bonacieux in morning costume , standing at his threshold .
all that the prudent planchet had said to him the preceding evening about the sinister character of the old man recurred to the mind of dartagnan , who looked at him with more attention than he had done before .
in fact , in addition to that yellow , sickly paleness which indicates the insinuation of the bile in the blood , and which might , besides , be accidental , dartagnan remarked something perfidiously significant in the play of the wrinkled features of his countenance .
a rogue does not laugh in the same way that an honest man does ; a hypocrite does not shed the tears of a man of good faith .
all falsehood is a mask ; and however well made the mask may be , with a little attention we may always succeed in distinguishing it from the true face .
it appeared , then , to dartagnan that m. bonacieux wore a mask , and likewise that that mask was most disagreeable to look upon .
in consequence of this feeling of repugnance , he was about to pass without speaking to him , but , as he had done the day before , m. bonacieux accosted him .
" well , young man , " said he , " we appear to pass rather gay nights !
seven oclock in the morning !
peste ! you seem to reverse ordinary customs , and come home at the hour when other people are going out . "
" no one can reproach you for anything of the kind , monsieur bonacieux , " said the young man ; " you are a model for regular people .
it is true that when a man possesses a young and pretty wife , he has no need to seek happiness elsewhere . happiness comes to meet him , does it not , monsieur bonacieux ? "
bonacieux became as pale as death , and grinned a ghastly smile .
" ah , ah ! " said bonacieux , " you are a jocular companion !
but where the devil were you gladding last night , my young master ?
it does not appear to be very clean in the crossroads . "
dartagnan glanced down at his boots , all covered with mud ; but that same glance fell upon the shoes and stockings of the mercer , and it might have been said they had been dipped in the same mud heap . both were stained with splashes of mud of the same appearance .
then a sudden idea crossed the mind of dartagnan .
that little stout man , short and elderly , that sort of lackey , dressed in dark clothes , treated without ceremony by the men wearing swords who composed the escort , was bonacieux himself .
the husband had presided at the abduction of his wife .
a terrible inclination seized dartagnan to grasp the mercer by the throat and strangle him ; but , as we have said , he was a very prudent youth , and he restrained himself .
however , the revolution which appeared upon his countenance was so visible that bonacieux was terrified at it , and he endeavored to draw back a step or two ; but as he was standing before the half of the door which was shut , the obstacle compelled him to keep his place .
" ah , but you are joking , my worthy man ! " said dartagnan . " it appears to me that if my boots need a sponge , your stockings and shoes stand in equal need of a brush .
may you not have been philandering a little also , monsieur bonacieux ?
oh , the devil ! that s unpardonable in a man of your age , and who besides , has such a pretty wife as yours . "
" oh , lord ! no , " said bonacieux , " but yesterday i went to st . mande to make some inquiries after a servant , as i can not possibly do without one ; and the roads were so bad that i brought back all this mud , which i have not yet had time to remove . "
the place named by bonacieux as that which had been the object of his journey was a fresh proof in support of the suspicions dartagnan had conceived .
bonacieux had named mande because mande was in an exactly opposite direction from st . cloud .
this probability afforded him his first consolation .
if bonacieux knew where his wife was , one might , by extreme means , force the mercer to open his teeth and let his secret escape .
the question , then , was how to change this probability into a certainty .
" pardon , my dear monsieur bonacieux , if i do nt stand upon ceremony , " said dartagnan , " but nothing makes one so thirsty as want of sleep . i am parched with thirst . allow me to take a glass of water in your apartment ; you know that is never refused among neighbors . "
without waiting for the permission of his host , dartagnan went quickly into the house , and cast a rapid glance at the bed .
it had not been used .
bonacieux had not been abed .
he had only been back an hour or two ; he had accompanied his wife to the place of her confinement , or else at least to the first relay .
" thanks , monsieur bonacieux , " said dartagnan , emptying his glass , " that is all i wanted of you .
i will now go up into my apartment . i will make planchet brush my boots ; and when he has done , i will , if you like , send him to you to brush your shoes . "
he left the mercer quite astonished at his singular farewell , and asking himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate .
at the top of the stairs he found planchet in a great fright .
" ah , monsieur ! " cried planchet , as soon as he perceived his master , " here is more trouble . i thought you would never come in . "
" what s the matter now , planchet ? " demanded dartagnan .
" oh ! i give you a hundred , i give you a thousand times to guess , monsieur , the visit i received in your absence . "
" when ? "
" about half an hour ago , while you were at monsieur de treville s . "
" who has been here ?
come , speak . "
" monsieur de cavois . "
" monsieur de cavois ? "
" in person . "
" the captain of the cardinal s guards ? "
" himself . "
" did he come to arrest me ? "
" i have no doubt that he did , monsieur , for all his wheedling manner . "
" was he so sweet , then ? "
" indeed , he was all honey , monsieur . "
" indeed ! "
" he came , he said , on the part of his eminence , who wished you well , and to beg you to follow him to the palais - royal . " [ * ]
" that the thing was impossible , seeing that you were not at home , as he could see . "
" well , what did he say then ? "
" that you must not fail to call upon him in the course of the day ; and then he added in a low voice ,  tell your master that his eminence is very well disposed toward him , and that his fortune perhaps depends upon this interview .  "
" the snare is rather maladroit for the cardinal , " replied the young man , smiling .
" oh , i saw the snare , and i answered you would be quite in despair on your return .
"  where has he gone ?  asked monsieur de cavois .
"  to troyes , in champagne ,  i answered .
"  and when did he set out ? 
"  yesterday evening .  "
" planchet , my friend , " interrupted dartagnan , " you are really a precious fellow . "
" that s the advice i was about to give monsieur ; and where are we going , may i ask , without being too curious ? "
" pardieu ! in the opposite direction to that which you said i was gone .
besides , are you not as anxious to learn news of grimaud , mousqueton , and bazin as i am to know what has become of athos , porthos , and aramis ? "
" yes , monsieur , " said planchet , " and i will go as soon as you please . indeed , i think provincial air will suit us much better just now than the air of paris .
so then-- "
" so then , pack up our luggage , planchet , and let us be off . on my part , i will go out with my hands in my pockets , that nothing may be suspected .
you may join me at the hotel des gardes .
by the way , planchet , i think you are right with respect to our host , and that he is decidedly a frightfully low wretch . "
" ah , monsieur , you may take my word when i tell you anything . i am a physiognomist , i assure you . "
dartagnan took charge of it .
ten minutes afterward planchet joined him at the stables of the hotel des gardes .
dartagnan , in order that there might be no time lost , had saddled his horse himself .
" that s well , " said he to planchet , when the latter added the portmanteau to the equipment . " now saddle the other three horses . "
" do you think , then , monsieur , that we shall travel faster with two horses apiece ? " said planchet , with his shrewd air .
" no , monsieur jester , " replied dartagnan ; " but with our four horses we may bring back our three friends , if we should have the good fortune to find them living . "
" which is a great chance , " replied planchet , " but we must not despair of the mercy of god . "
" amen ! " said dartagnan , getting into his saddle .
as they went from the hotel des gardes , they separated , leaving the street at opposite ends , one having to quit paris by the barriere de la villette and the other by the barriere montmartre , to meet again beyond st . denis -- a strategic maneuver which , having been executed with equal punctuality , was crowned with the most fortunate results .
dartagnan and planchet entered pierrefitte together .
planchet was more courageous , it must be admitted , by day than by night .
his natural prudence , however , never forsook him for a single instant . he had forgotten not one of the incidents of the first journey , and he looked upon everybody he met on the road as an enemy .
it followed that his hat was forever in his hand , which procured him some severe reprimands from dartagnan , who feared that his excess of politeness would lead people to think he was the lackey of a man of no consequence .
nevertheless , whether the passengers were really touched by the urbanity of planchet or whether this time nobody was posted on the young man s road , our two travelers arrived at chantilly without any accident , and alighted at the tavern of great st . martin , the same at which they had stopped on their first journey .
the host , on seeing a young man followed by a lackey with two extra horses , advanced respectfully to the door .
now , as they had already traveled eleven leagues , dartagnan thought it time to stop , whether porthos were or were not in the inn .
perhaps it would not be prudent to ask at once what had become of the musketeer .
the result of these reflections was that dartagnan , without asking information of any kind , alighted , commended the horses to the care of his lackey , entered a small room destined to receive those who wished to be alone , and desired the host to bring him a bottle of his best wine and as good a breakfast as possible -- a desire which further corroborated the high opinion the innkeeper had formed of the traveler at first sight .
dartagnan was therefore served with miraculous celerity .
the regiment of the guards was recruited among the first gentlemen of the kingdom ; and dartagnan , followed by a lackey , and traveling with four magnificent horses , despite the simplicity of his uniform , could not fail to make a sensation .
the host desired himself to serve him ; which dartagnan perceiving , ordered two glasses to be brought , and commenced the following conversation .
" my faith , my good host , " said dartagnan , filling the two glasses , " i asked for a bottle of your best wine , and if you have deceived me , you will be punished in what you have sinned ; for seeing that i hate drinking my myself , you shall drink with me .
take your glass , then , and let us drink .
but what shall we drink to , so as to avoid wounding any susceptibility ?
let us drink to the prosperity of your establishment . "
" your lordship does me much honor , " said the host , " and i thank you sincerely for your kind wish . "
now , i travel a great deal , particularly on this road , and i wish to see all innkeepers making a fortune . "
" exactly so , " said the host ; " i remember it perfectly .
it is not monsieur porthos that your lordship means ? "
" yes , that is my companion s name .
my god , my dear host , tell me if anything has happened to him ? "
" your lordship must have observed that he could not continue his journey . "
" why , to be sure , he promised to rejoin us , and we have seen nothing of him . "
" he has done us the honor to remain here . "
" what , he had done you the honor to remain here ? "
" yes , monsieur , in this house ; and we are even a little uneasy-- "
" on what account ? "
" of certain expenses he has contracted . "
" ah , monsieur , you infuse genuine balm into my blood .
" porthos is wounded , then ? "
" i can not tell you , monsieur . " " what !
" yes ; but in our situation we must not say all we know -- particularly as we have been warned that our ears should answer for our tongues . "
" well , can i see porthos ? "
" certainly , monsieur .
take the stairs on your right ; go up the first flight and knock at number one .
only warn him that it is you . "
" why should i do that ? "
" because , monsieur , some mischief might happen to you . "
" of what kind , in the name of wonder ? "
" monsieur porthos may imagine you belong to the house , and in a fit of passion might run his sword through you or blow out your brains . " " what have you done to him , then ? "
" we have asked him for money . "
" the devil ! ah , i can understand that .
" playing the day before ! and with whom ? "
" lord , who can say , monsieur ? with some gentleman who was traveling this way , to whom he proposed a game of lansquenet . "
" that s it , then , and the foolish fellow lost all he had ? "
" even to his horse , monsieur ; for when the gentleman was about to set out , we perceived that his lackey was saddling monsieur porthos s horse , as well as his master s .
when we observed this to him , he told us all to trouble ourselves about our own business , as this horse belonged to him .
" that s porthos all over , " murmured dartagnan .
" then , " continued the host , " i replied that as from the moment we seemed not likely to come to a good understanding with respect to payment , i hoped that he would have at least the kindness to grant the favor of his custom to my brother host of the golden eagle ; but monsieur porthos replied that , my house being the best , he should remain where he was .
this reply was too flattering to allow me to insist on his departure .
since that time , monsieur , nobody entered his chamber but his servant . " " what !
mousqueton is here , then ? "
" oh , yes , monsieur . five days after your departure , he came back , and in a very bad condition , too . it appears that he had met with disagreeableness , likewise , on his journey .
" the fact is , " said dartagnan , " i have always observed a great degree of intelligence and devotedness in mousqueton . "
" that is possible , monsieur ; but suppose i should happen to be brought in contact , even four times a year , with such intelligence and devotedness -- why , i should be a ruined man ! "
" no , for porthos will pay you . "
" hum ! " said the host , in a doubtful tone .
" the favorite of a great lady will not be allowed to be inconvenienced for such a paltry sum as he owes you . "
" if i durst say what i believe on that head-- "
" what you believe ? "
" i ought rather to say , what i know . "
" what you know ? "
" and even what i am sure of . "
" and of what are you so sure ? "
" i would say that i know this great lady . "
" you ? "
" yes ; i. "
" and how do you know her ? "
" oh , monsieur , if i could believe i might trust in your discretion . "
" speak ! by the word of a gentleman , you shall have no cause to repent of your confidence . "
" well , monsieur , you understand that uneasiness makes us do many things . "
" what have you done ? "
" oh , nothing which was not right in the character of a creditor . "
" well ? "
" monsieur porthos gave us a note for his duchess , ordering us to put it in the post .
this was before his servant came .
as he could not leave his chamber , it was necessary to charge us with this commission . "
" and then ? "
" instead of putting the letter in the post , which is never safe , i took advantage of the journey of one of my lads to paris , and ordered him to convey the letter to this duchess himself .
this was fulfilling the intentions of monsieur porthos , who had desired us to be so careful of this letter , was it not ? "
" nearly so . "
" well , monsieur , do you know who this great lady is ? "
" no ; i have heard porthos speak of her , that s all . "
" do you know who this pretended duchess is ?
" i repeat to you , i do nt know her . "
" why , she is the old wife of a procurator * of the chatelet , monsieur , named madame coquenard , who , although she is at least fifty , still gives herself jealous airs .
it struck me as very odd that a princess should live in the rue aux ours . " _ * attorney _
" but how do you know all this ? "
" because she flew into a great passion on receiving the letter , saying that monsieur porthos was a weathercock , and that she was sure it was for some woman he had received this wound . "
" has he been wounded , then ? "
" oh , good lord ! what have i said ? "
" you said that porthos had received a sword cut . "
" yes , but he has forbidden me so strictly to say so . "
" zounds , monsieur !
because he had boasted that he would perforate the stranger with whom you left him in dispute ; whereas the stranger , on the contrary , in spite of all his rodomontades quickly threw him on his back .
as monsieur porthos is a very boastful man , he insists that nobody shall know he has received this wound except the duchess , whom he endeavored to interest by an account of his adventure . "
" it is a wound that confines him to his bed ? "
" ah , and a master stroke , too , i assure you .
your friend s soul must stick tight to his body . "
" were you there , then ? "
" monsieur , i followed them from curiosity , so that i saw the combat without the combatants seeing me . "
" and what took place ? " " oh !
he immediately fell backward .
the stranger placed the point of his sword at his throat ; and monsieur porthos , finding himself at the mercy of his adversary , acknowledged himself conquered .
upon which the stranger asked his name , and learning that it was porthos , and not dartagnan , he assisted him to rise , brought him back to the hotel , mounted his horse , and disappeared . "
" so it was with monsieur dartagnan this stranger meant to quarrel ? "
" it appears so . "
" and do you know what has become of him ? "
" no , i never saw him until that moment , and have not seen him since . "
" very well ; i know all that i wish to know .
porthos s chamber is , you say , on the first story , number one ? "
" yes , monsieur , the handsomest in the inn -- a chamber that i could have let ten times over . "
" bah ! be satisfied , " said dartagnan , laughing , " porthos will pay you with the money of the duchess coquenard . "
" oh , monsieur , procurator s wife or duchess , if she will but loosen her pursestrings , it will be all the same ; but she positively answered that she was tired of the exigencies and infidelities of monsieur porthos , and that she would not send him a denier . "
" and did you convey this answer to your guest ? "
" we took good care not to do that ; he would have found in what fashion we had executed his commission . "
" so that he still expects his money ? "
" oh , lord , yes , monsieur !
yesterday he wrote again ; but it was his servant who this time put the letter in the post . "
" do you say the procurator s wife is old and ugly ? "
" fifty at least , monsieur , and not at all handsome , according to pathaud s account . "
" in that case , you may be quite at ease ; she will soon be softened . besides , porthos can not owe you much . "
" how , not much !
twenty good pistoles , already , without reckoning the doctor .
he denies himself nothing ; it may easily be seen he has been accustomed to live well . "
" never mind ; if his mistress abandons him , he will find friends , i will answer for it .
so , my dear host , be not uneasy , and continue to take all the care of him that his situation requires . "
" monsieur has promised me not to open his mouth about the procurator s wife , and not to say a word of the wound ? "
" that s agreed ; you have my word . "
" oh , he would kill me ! "
" do nt be afraid ; he is not so much of a devil as he appears . "
saying these words , dartagnan went upstairs , leaving his host a little better satisfied with respect to two things in which he appeared to be very much interested -- his debt and his life .
at the top of the stairs , upon the most conspicuous door of the corridor , was traced in black ink a gigantic number " 1 . " dartagnan knocked , and upon the bidding to come in which came from inside , he entered the chamber .
in addition to this he perceived that the top of a wardrobe and the marble of a commode were covered with empty bottles .
at the sight of his friend , porthos uttered a loud cry of joy ; and mousqueton , rising respectfully , yielded his place to him , and went to give an eye to the two stewpans , of which he appeared to have the particular inspection .
" no . "
" has the host told you nothing , then ? "
" i asked after you , and came up as soon as i could . "
porthos seemed to breathe more freely .
" and what has happened to you , my dear porthos ? " continued dartagnan .
" why , on making a thrust at my adversary , whom i had already hit three times , and whom i meant to finish with the fourth , i put my foot on a stone , slipped , and strained my knee . "
" truly ? "
" honor !
luckily for the rascal , for i should have left him dead on the spot , i assure you . "
" and what has became of him ? "
" oh , i do nt know ; he had enough , and set off without waiting for the rest . but you , my dear dartagnan , what has happened to you ? "
" so that this strain of the knee , " continued dartagnan , " my dear porthos , keeps you in bed ? "
" my god , that s all . i shall be about again in a few days . "
" why did you not have yourself conveyed to paris ?
you must be cruelly bored here . "
" that was my intention ; but , my dear friend , i have one thing to confess to you . "
" what s that ? "
" it is that as i was cruelly bored , as you say , and as i had the seventy - five pistoles in my pocket which you had distributed to me , in order to amuse myself i invited a gentleman who was traveling this way to walk up , and proposed a cast of dice .
he accepted my challenge , and , my faith , my seventy - five pistoles passed from my pocket to his , without reckoning my horse , which he won into the bargain .
but you , my dear dartagnan ? "
" well ? "
" well , she must be at her country seat , for she has not answered me . "
" truly ? "
" but your host behaves very well toward you , as it appears , my dear porthos , " said dartagnan , directing the sick man s attention to the full stewpans and the empty bottles .
" so , so , " replied porthos .
" only three or four days ago the impertinent jackanapes gave me his bill , and i was forced to turn both him and his bill out of the door ; so that i am here something in the fashion of a conqueror , holding my position , as it were , my conquest .
so you see , being in constant fear of being forced from that position , i am armed to the teeth . "
" and yet , " said dartagnan , laughing , " it appears to me that from time to time you must make sorties . "
and he again pointed to the bottles and the stewpans .
" not i , unfortunately ! " said porthos .
" this miserable strain confines me to my bed ; but mousqueton forages , and brings in provisions .
friend mousqueton , you see that we have a reinforcement , and we must have an increase of supplies . "
" mousqueton , " said dartagnan , " you must render me a service . "
" what , monsieur ? "
" lord , monsieur ! there is nothing more easy , " said mousqueton , with a modest air .
" one only needs to be sharp , that s all .
i was brought up in the country , and my father in his leisure time was something of a poacher . "
" and what did he do the rest of his time ? "
" monsieur , he carried on a trade which i have always thought satisfactory . "
" which ? "
now , he was accustomed to walk with his fowling piece on his shoulder , behind the hedges which border the roads , and when he saw a catholic coming alone , the protestant religion immediately prevailed in his mind .
he lowered his gun in the direction of the traveler ; then , when he was within ten paces of him , he commenced a conversation which almost always ended by the traveler s abandoning his purse to save his life .
for my part , monsieur , i am catholic -- my father , faithful to his principles , having made my elder brother a huguenot . "
" and what was the end of this worthy man ? " asked dartagnan .
" oh , of the most unfortunate kind , monsieur .
one day he was surprised in a lonely road between a huguenot and a catholic , with both of whom he had before had business , and who both knew him again ; so they united against him and hanged him on a tree . then they came and boasted of their fine exploit in the cabaret of the next village , where my brother and i were drinking . "
" and what did you do ? " said dartagnan .
" we let them tell their story out , " replied mousqueton .
" then , as in leaving the cabaret they took different directions , my brother went and hid himself on the road of the catholic , and i on that of the huguenot .
two hours after , all was over ; we had done the business of both , admiring the foresight of our poor father , who had taken the precaution to bring each of us up in a different religion . "
" well , i must allow , as you say , your father was a very intelligent fellow .
and you say in his leisure moments the worthy man was a poacher ? "
" yes , monsieur , and it was he who taught me to lay a snare and ground a line .
while walking near the wood of monsieur le prince , i laid a few snare in the runs ; and while reclining on the banks of his highness s pieces of water , i slipped a few lines into his fish ponds .
so that now , thanks be to god , we do not want , as monsieur can testify , for partridges , rabbits , carp or eels -- all light , wholesome food , suitable for the sick . "
" but the wine , " said dartagnan , " who furnishes the wine ? your host ? "
" that is to say , yes and no . "
" how yes and no ? "
" he furnishes it , it is true , but he does not know that he has that honor . "
" explain yourself , mousqueton ; your conversation is full of instructive things . "
" that is it , monsieur .
it has so chanced that i met with a spaniard in my peregrinations who had seen many countries , and among them the new world . "
" what connection can the new world have with the bottles which are on the commode and the wardrobe ? "
" patience , monsieur , everything will come in its turn . "
" this spaniard had in his service a lackey who had accompanied him in his voyage to mexico .
this lackey was my compatriot ; and we became the more intimate from there being many resemblances of character between us .
my friend placed a bottle at the distance of thirty paces , and at each cast he caught the neck of the bottle in his running noose .
i practiced this exercise , and as nature has endowed me with some faculties , at this day i can throw the lasso with any man in the world .
well , do you understand , monsieur ?
our host has a well - furnished cellar the key of which never leaves him ; only this cellar has a ventilating hole .
you see , monsieur , what the new world has to do with the bottles which are on the commode and the wardrobe .
now , will you taste our wine , and without prejudice say what you think of it ? "
" thank you , my friend , thank you ; unfortunately , i have just breakfasted . "
" well , " said porthos , " arrange the table , mousqueton , and while we breakfast , dartagnan will relate to us what has happened to him during the ten days since he left us . "
" willingly , " said dartagnan .
while porthos and mousqueton were breakfasting , with the appetites of convalescents and with that brotherly cordiality which unites men in misfortune , dartagnan related how aramis , being wounded , was obliged to stop at crevecoeur , how he had left athos fighting at amiens with four men who accused him of being a coiner , and how he , dartagnan , had been forced to run the comtes de wardes through the body in order to reach england .
but there the confidence of dartagnan stopped . he only added that on his return from great britain he had brought back four magnificent horses -- one for himself , and one for each of his companions ; then he informed porthos that the one intended for him was already installed in the stable of the tavern .
at this moment planchet entered , to inform his master that the horses were sufficiently refreshed and that it would be possible to sleep at clermont .
as dartagnan was tolerably reassured with regard to porthos , and as he was anxious to obtain news of his two other friends , he held out his hand to the wounded man , and told him he was about to resume his route in order to continue his researches .
for the rest , as he reckoned upon returning by the same route in seven or eight days , if porthos were still at the great st . martin , he would call for him on his way .
porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would not permit him to depart yet awhile .
besides , it was necessary he should stay at chantilly to wait for the answer from his duchess .
dartagnan wished that answer might be prompt and favorable ; and having again recommended porthos to the care of mousqueton , and paid his bill to the host , he resumed his route with planchet , already relieved of one of his led horses .
26 aramis and his thesis
dartagnan had said nothing to porthos of his wound or of his procurator s wife .
our bearnais was a prudent lad , however young he might be . consequently he had appeared to believe all that the vainglorious musketeer had told him , convinced that no friendship will hold out against a surprised secret . besides , we feel always a sort of mental superiority over those whose lives we know better than they suppose .
in his projects of intrigue for the future , and determined as he was to make his three friends the instruments of his fortune , dartagnan was not sorry at getting into his grasp beforehand the invisible strings by which he reckoned upon moving them .
for himself , he had no doubt she was a victim of the cardinal s vengeance ; and , and as was well known , the vengeance of his eminence was terrible .
how he had found grace in the eyes of the minister , he did not know ; but without doubt m. de cavois would have revealed this to him if the captain of the guards had found him at home .
nothing makes time pass more quickly or more shortens a journey than a thought which absorbs in itself all the faculties of the organization of him who thinks .
external existence then resembles a sleep of which this thought is the dream .
by its influence , time has no longer measure , space has no longer distance .
we depart from one place , and arrive at another , that is all .
of the interval passed , nothing remains in the memory but a vague mist in which a thousand confused images of trees , mountains , and landscapes are lost .
it was as a prey to this hallucination that dartagnan traveled , at whatever pace his horse pleased , the six or eight leagues that separated chantilly from crevecoeur , without his being able to remember on his arrival in the village any of the things he had passed or met with on the road .
there only his memory returned to him . he shook his head , perceived the cabaret at which he had left aramis , and putting his horse to the trot , he shortly pulled up at the door .
" my good dame , " asked dartagnan , " can you tell me what has become of one of my friends , whom we were obliged to leave here about a dozen days ago ? "
" a handsome young man , three- or four - and - twenty years old , mild , amiable , and well made ? "
" that is he -- wounded in the shoulder . "
" just so .
well , monsieur , he is still here . "
" ah , pardieu ! my dear dame , " said dartagnan , springing from his horse , and throwing the bridle to planchet , " you restore me to life ; where is this dear aramis ? let me embrace him , i am in a hurry to see him again . "
" pardon , monsieur , but i doubt whether he can see you at this moment . "
" why so ? has he a lady with him ? " " jesus !
what do you mean by that ? poor lad !
no , monsieur , he has not a lady with him . "
" with whom is he , then ? "
" with the curate of montdidier and the superior of the jesuits of amiens . "
" good heavens ! " cried dartagnan , " is the poor fellow worse , then ? "
" no , monsieur , quite the contrary ; but after his illness grace touched him , and he determined to take orders . "
" that s it ! " said dartagnan , " i had forgotten that he was only a musketeer for a time . "
" monsieur still insists upon seeing him ? "
" more than ever . "
" well , monsieur has only to take the right - hand staircase in the courtyard , and knock at number five on the second floor . "
dartagnan walked quickly in the direction indicated , and found one of those exterior staircases that are still to be seen in the yards of our old - fashioned taverns .
but there was no getting at the place of sojourn of the future abbe ; the defiles of the chamber of aramis were as well guarded as the gardens of armida . bazin was stationed in the corridor , and barred his passage with the more intrepidity that , after many years of trial , bazin found himself near a result of which he had ever been ambitious .
the daily - renewed promise of the young man that the moment would not long be delayed , had alone kept him in the service of a musketeer -- a service in which , he said , his soul was in constant jeopardy .
bazin was then at the height of joy .
in all probability , this time his master would not retract .
the union of physical pain with moral uneasiness had produced the effect so long desired . aramis , suffering at once in body and mind , had at length fixed his eyes and his thoughts upon religion , and he had considered as a warning from heaven the double accident which had happened to him ; that is to say , the sudden disappearance of his mistress and the wound in his shoulder .
it may be easily understood that in the present disposition of his master nothing could be more disagreeable to bazin than the arrival of dartagnan , which might cast his master back again into that vortex of mundane affairs which had so long carried him away .
he resolved , then , to defend the door bravely ; and as , betrayed by the mistress of the inn , he could not say that aramis was absent , he endeavored to prove to the newcomer that it would be the height of indiscretion to disturb his master in his pious conference , which had commenced with the morning and would not , as bazin said , terminate before night .
but dartagnan took very little heed of the eloquent discourse of m. bazin ; and as he had no desire to support a polemic discussion with his friend s valet , he simply moved him out of the way with one hand , and with the other turned the handle of the door of number five .
the door opened , and dartagnan went into the chamber .
aramis , in a black gown , his head enveloped in a sort of round flat cap , not much unlike a calotte , was seated before an oblong table , covered with rolls of paper and enormous volumes in folio . at his right hand was placed the superior of the jesuits , and on his left the curate of montdidier .
the curtains were half drawn , and only admitted the mysterious light calculated for beatific reveries .
in their stead dartagnan thought he perceived in an obscure corner a discipline cord suspended from a nail in the wall .
at the noise made by dartagnan in entering , aramis lifted up his head , and beheld his friend ; but to the great astonishment of the young man , the sight of him did not produce much effect upon the musketeer , so completely was his mind detached from the things of this world .
" good day , dear dartagnan , " said aramis ; " believe me , i am glad to see you . "
" so am i delighted to see you , " said dartagnan , " although i am not yet sure that it is aramis i am speaking to . "
" to himself , my friend , to himself ! but what makes you doubt it ? "
" i was afraid i had made a mistake in the chamber , and that i had found my way into the apartment of some churchman . then another error seized me on seeing you in company with these gentlemen -- i was afraid you were dangerously ill . "
the two men in black , who guessed dartagnan s meaning , darted at him a glance which might have been thought threatening ; but dartagnan took no heed of it .
" i disturb you , perhaps , my dear aramis , " continued dartagnan , " for by what i see , i am led to believe that you are confessing to these gentlemen . "
aramis colored imperceptibly .
" you disturb me ? oh , quite the contrary , dear friend , i swear ; and as a proof of what i say , permit me to declare i am rejoiced to see you safe and sound . "
" ah , he ll come round , " thought dartagnan ; " that s not bad ! "
" this gentleman , who is my friend , has just escaped from a serious danger , " continued aramis , with unction , pointing to dartagnan with his hand , and addressing the two ecclesiastics .
" praise god , monsieur , " replied they , bowing together .
" i have not failed to do so , your reverences , " replied the young man , returning their salutation .
" you arrive in good time , dear dartagnan , " said aramis , " and by taking part in our discussion may assist us with your intelligence .
monsieur the principal of amiens , monsieur the curate of montdidier , and i are arguing certain theological questions in which we have been much interested ; i shall be delighted to have your opinion . "
" the opinion of a swordsman can have very little weight , " replied dartagnan , who began to be uneasy at the turn things were taking , " and you had better be satisfied , believe me , with the knowledge of these gentlemen . "
the two men in black bowed in their turn .
" on the contrary , " replied aramis , " your opinion will be very valuable . the question is this : monsieur the principal thinks that my thesis ought to be dogmatic and didactic . "
" your thesis ! are you then making a thesis ? "
" without doubt , " replied the jesuit . " in the examination which precedes ordination , a thesis is always a requisite . "
this is the reason why monsieur the principal has proposed to me the following subject , which has not yet been treated upon , and in which i perceive there is matter for magnificent elaboration-utraque manus in benedicendo clericis inferioribus necessaria est .  "
" which means , " resumed aramis , that he might perfectly understand , "  the two hands are indispensable for priests of the inferior orders , when they bestow the benediction .  "
" an admirable subject ! " cried the jesuit .
" admirable and dogmatic ! " repeated the curate , who , about as strong as dartagnan with respect to latin , carefully watched the jesuit in order to keep step with him , and repeated his words like an echo .
as to dartagnan , he remained perfectly insensible to the enthusiasm of the two men in black .
" yes , admirable ! prorsus admirabile ! " continued aramis ; " but which requires a profound study of both the scriptures and the fathers .
now , i have confessed to these learned ecclesiastics , and that in all humility , that the duties of mounting guard and the service of the king have caused me to neglect study a little .
i should find myself , therefore , more at my ease , facilus natans , in a subject of my own choice , which would be to these hard theological questions what morals are to metaphysics in philosophy . "
dartagnan began to be tired , and so did the curate .
" see what an exordium ! " cried the jesuit .
" exordium , " repeated the curate , for the sake of saying something .
" quemadmodum inter coelorum immnsitatem . "
aramis cast a glance upon dartagnan to see what effect all this produced , and found his friend gaping enough to split his jaws .
" let us speak french , my father , " said he to the jesuit ; " monsieur dartagnan will enjoy our conversation better . "
" yes , " replied dartagnan ; " i am fatigued with reading , and all this latin confuses me . "
" well , let us see what is to be derived from this gloss .
besides , what does the gospel say ? imponite manus , and not manum - place the hands , not the hand . "
" place the hands , " repeated the curate , with a gesture .
are you there , now ? "
" certes , " replied aramis , in a pleased tone , " but the thing is subtle . "
" the fingers , " resumed the jesuit , " st . peter blessed with the fingers .
the pope , therefore blesses with the fingers .
and with how many fingers does he bless ?
with three fingers , to be sure - one for the father , one for the son , and one for the holy ghost . "
all crossed themselves . dartagnan thought it was proper to follow this example .
" the pope is the successor of st . peter , and represents the three divine powers ; the rest - ordines inferiores - of the ecclesiastical hierarchy bless in the name of the holy archangels and angels .
the most humble clerks such as our deacons and sacristans , bless with holy water sprinklers , which resemble an infinite number of blessing fingers .
there is the subject simplified .
dartagnan trembled .
" certes , " said aramis , " i do justice to the beauties of this thesis ; but at the same time i perceive it would be overwhelming for me .
i had chosen this text - tell me , dear dartagnan , if it is not to your taste-non inutile est desiderium in oblatione  ; that is ,  a little regret is not unsuitable in an offering to the lord .  "
" stop there ! " cried the jesuit , " for that thesis touches closely upon heresy . there is a proposition almost like it in the augustinus of the heresiarch jansenius , whose book will sooner or later be burned by the hands of the executioner .
take care , my young friend . you are inclining toward false doctrines , my young friend ; you will be lost . "
" you will be lost , " said the curate , shaking his head sorrowfully .
" you approach that famous point of free will which is a mortal rock .
you face the insinuations of the pelagians and the semi - pelagians . "
" but , my reverend- " replied aramis , a little amazed by the shower of arguments that poured upon his head .
" and that is mine also , " said the curate .
" but , for heaven s sake- " resumed aramis .
" desideras diabolum , unhappy man ! " cried the jesuit .
" he regrets the devil !
ah , my young friend , " added the curate , groaning , " do not regret the devil , i implore you ! "
dartagnan felt himself bewildered . it seemed to him as though he were in a madhouse , and was becoming as mad as those he saw .
he was , however , forced to hold his tongue from not comprehending half the language they employed .
" but listen to me , then , " resumed aramis with politeness mingled with a little impatience . " i do not say i regret ; no , i will never pronounce that sentence , which would not be orthodox . "
the jesuit raised his hands toward heaven , and the curate did the same .
" no ; but pray grant me that it is acting with an ill grace to offer to the lord only that with which we are perfectly disgusted !
the jesuit and the curate quite started from their chairs .
" this is the point of departure ; it is a syllogism .
the world is not wanting in attractions . i quit the world ; then i make a sacrifice . now , the scripture says positively ,  make a sacrifice unto the lord .  "
" that is true , " said his antagonists .
" and then , " said aramis , pinching his ear to make it red , as he rubbed his hands to make them white , " and then i made a certain rondeau upon it last year , which i showed to monsieur voiture , and that great man paid me a thousand compliments . "
" a rondeau ! " said the jesuit , disdainfully .
" a rondeau ! " said the curate , mechanically .
" repeat it ! repeat it ! " cried dartagnan ; " it will make a little change . "
" not so , for it is religious , " replied aramis ; " it is theology in verse . "
" the devil ! " said dartagnan .
" here it is , " said aramis , with a little look of diffidence , which , however , was not exempt from a shade of hypocrisy :
" vous qui pleurez un passe plein de charmes , et qui trainez des jours infortunes , tous vos malheurs se verront termines , quand a dieu seul vous offrirez vos larmes , vous qui pleurez ! "
dartagnan and the curate appeared pleased .
the jesuit persisted in his opinion .
" beware of a profane taste in your theological style .
what says augustine on this subject :  severus sit clericorum verbo .  "
" yes , let the sermon be clear , " said the curate .
" now , " hastily interrupted the jesuit , on seeing that his acolyte was going astray , " now your thesis would please the ladies ; it would have the success of one of monsieur patru s pleadings . "
" please god ! " cried aramis , transported .
" there it is , " cried the jesuit ; " the world still speaks within you in a loud voice , altisimm voce .
you follow the world , my young friend , and i tremble lest grace prove not efficacious . "
" be satisfied , my reverend father , i can answer for myself . "
" mundane presumption ! "
" i know myself , father ; my resolution is irrevocable . "
" i feel myself called upon to treat that , and no other .
i will see about the continuation of it , and tomorrow i hope you will be satisfied with the corrections i shall have made in consequence of your advice . "
" work slowly , " said the curate ; " we leave you in an excellent tone of mind . "
" yes , the ground is all sown , " said the jesuit , " and we have not to fear that one portion of the seed may have fallen upon stone , another upon the highway , or that the birds of heaven have eaten the rest , aves coeli comederunt illam . "
" plague stifle you and your latin ! " said dartagnan , who began to feel all his patience exhausted .
" till tomorrow , rash youth , " said the jesuit .
" you promise to become one of the lights of the church . heaven grant that this light prove not a devouring fire ! "
dartagnan , who for an hour past had been gnawing his nails with impatience , was beginning to attack the quick .
the two men in black rose , bowed to aramis and dartagnan , and advanced toward the door .
bazin , who had been standing listening to all this controversy with a pious jubilation , sprang toward them , took the breviary of the curate and the missal of the jesuit , and walked respectfully before them to clear their way .
" yes , efficacious grace has touched you , as that gentleman said just now . "
" oh , these plans of retreat have been formed for a long time .
" yes ; but i confess i always thought you jested . " " with such things !
oh , dartagnan ! "
" the devil !
why , people jest with death . "
" and people are wrong , dartagnan ; for death is the door which leads to perdition or to salvation . "
" we will dine directly , my friend ; only you must please to remember that this is friday . now , on such a day i can neither eat flesh nor see it eaten .
if you can be satisfied with my dinner - it consists of cooked tetragones and fruits . "
" what do you mean by tetragones ? " asked dartagnan , uneasily .
" i mean spinach , " replied aramis ; " but on your account i will add some eggs , and that is a serious infraction of the rule - for eggs are meat , since they engender chickens . "
" i am grateful to you for the sacrifice , " said aramis ; " but if your body be not greatly benefited by it , be assured your soul will . "
" and so , aramis , you are decidedly going into the church ?
what will our two friends say ? what will monsieur de treville say ?
they will treat you as a deserter , i warn you . "
" i do not enter the church ; i re - enter it .
i deserted the church for the world , for you know that i forced myself when i became a musketeer . " " i ?
i know nothing about it . "
" you do nt know i quit the seminary ? "
" not at all . "
" this is my story , then . besides , the scriptures say ,  confess yourselves to one another ,  and i confess to you , dartagnan . "
" and i give you absolution beforehand . you see i am a good sort of a man . "
" do not jest about holy things , my friend . "
" go on , then , i listen . "
if you venture again into the house in which i have met you this evening , i will dare it myself . 
i really think i must have been frightened . i became very pale ; i felt my legs fail me ; i sought for a reply , but could find none - i was silent .
the officer waited for his reply , and seeing it so long coming , he burst into a laugh , turned upon his heel , and re - entered the house .
i returned to the seminary .
" i am a gentleman born , and my blood is warm , as you may have remarked , my dear dartagnan . the insult was terrible , and although unknown to the rest of the world , i felt it live and fester at the bottom of my heart .
i informed my superiors that i did not feel myself sufficiently prepared for ordination , and at my request the ceremony was postponed for a year .
i sought out the best fencing master in paris , i made an agreement with him to take a lesson every day , and every day for a year i took that lesson .
then , on the anniversary of the day on which i had been insulted , i hung my cassock on a peg , assumed the costume of a cavalier , and went to a ball given by a lady friend of mine and to which i knew my man was invited .
it was in the rue des france - bourgeois , close to la force .
as i expected , my officer was there . i went up to him as he was singing a love ditty and looking tenderly at a lady , and interrupted him exactly in the middle of the second couplet .  monsieur ,  said i ,  does it still displease you that i should frequent a certain house of la rue payenne ?
the officer looked at me with astonishment , and then said ,  what is your business with me , monsieur ?
ladies ,  said the officer ,  do not disturb yourselves ; allow me time just to kill this gentleman , and i will return and finish the last couplet . 
" we went out .
i took him to the rue payenne , to exactly the same spot where , a year before , at the very same hour , he had paid me the compliment i have related to you .
it was a superb moonlight night .
we immediately drew , and at the first pass i laid him stark dead . "
" the devil ! " cried dartagnan .
" now , " continued aramis , " as the ladies did not see the singer come back , and as he was found in the rue payenne with a great sword wound through his body , it was supposed that i had accommodated him thus ; and the matter created some scandal which obliged me to renounce the cassock for a time .
athos , whose acquaintance i made about that period , and porthos , who had in addition to my lessons taught me some effective tricks of fence , prevailed upon me to solicit the uniform of a musketeer .
the king entertained great regard for my father , who had fallen at the siege of arras , and the uniform was granted .
you may understand that the moment has come for me to re - enter the bosom of the church . "
" and why today , rather than yesterday or tomorrow ?
what has happened to you today , to raise all these melancholy ideas ? "
" this wound , my dear dartagnan , has been a warning to me from heaven . "
" this wound ? bah , it is now nearly healed , and i am sure it is not that which gives you the most pain . "
" what , then ? " said aramis , blushing .
" you have one at heart , aramis , one deeper and more painful -- a wound made by a woman . "
the eye of aramis kindled in spite of himself .
according to your idea , then , my brain is turned . and for whom - for some grisette , some chambermaid with whom i have trifled in some garrison ?
fie ! " " pardon , my dear aramis , but i thought you carried your eyes higher . "
" higher ? and who am i , to nourish such ambition ? a poor musketeer , a beggar , an unknown - who hates slavery , and finds himself ill - placed in the world . "
" aramis , aramis ! " cried dartagnan , looking at his friend with an air of doubt .
" dust i am , and to dust i return .
life is full of humiliations and sorrows , " continued he , becoming still more melancholy ; " all the ties which attach him to life break in the hand of man , particularly the golden ties .
oh , my dear dartagnan , " resumed aramis , giving to his voice a slight tone of bitterness , " trust me !
conceal your wounds when you have any ; silence is the last joy of the unhappy . beware of giving anyone the clue to your griefs ; the curious suck our tears as flies suck the blood of a wounded hart . "
" alas , my dear aramis , " said dartagnan , in his turn heaving a profound sigh , " that is my story you are relating ! "
" how ? "
" yes ; a woman whom i love , whom i adore , has just been torn from me by force .
i do not know where she is or whither they have conducted her . she is perhaps a prisoner ; she is perhaps dead ! "
" yes , but you have at least this consolation , that you can say to yourself she has not quit you voluntarily , that if you learn no news of her , it is because all communication with you is interdicted ; while i-- "
" well ? "
" nothing , " replied aramis , " nothing . "
" so you renounce the world , then , forever ; that is a settled thing -- a resolution registered ! "
" forever !
you are my friend today ; tomorrow you will be no more to me than a shadow , or rather , even , you will no longer exist .
as for the world , it is a sepulcher and nothing else . "
" the devil ! all this is very sad which you tell me . "
" what will you ? my vocation commands me ; it carries me away . "
dartagnan smiled , but made no answer .
aramis continued , " and yet , while i do belong to the earth , i wish to speak of you -- of our friends . "
" and on my part , " said dartagnan , " i wished to speak of you , but i find you so completely detached from everything ! to love you cry ,  fie ! friends are shadows ! the world is a sepulcher !  "
" alas , you will find it so yourself , " said aramis , with a sigh .
" well , then , let us say no more about it , " said dartagnan ; " and let us burn this letter , which , no doubt , announces to you some fresh infidelity of your grisette or your chambermaid . "
" what letter ? " cried aramis , eagerly .
" a letter which was sent to your abode in your absence , and which was given to me for you . "
" but from whom is that letter ? "
" oh , from some heartbroken waiting woman , some desponding grisette ; from madame de chevreuse s chambermaid , perhaps , who was obliged to return to tours with her mistress , and who , in order to appear smart and attractive , stole some perfumed paper , and sealed her letter with a duchess s coronet . "
" what do you say ? "
" hold ! i must have lost it , " said the young man maliciously , pretending to search for it .
" but fortunately the world is a sepulcher ; the men , and consequently the women , are but shadows , and love is a sentiment to which you cry ,  fie ! fie !  "
" dartagnan , dartagnan , " cried aramis , " you are killing me ! "
" well , here it is at last ! " said dartagnan , as he drew the letter from his pocket .
aramis made a bound , seized the letter , read it , or rather devoured it , his countenance radiant .
" this same waiting maid seems to have an agreeable style , " said the messenger , carelessly .
" thanks , dartagnan , thanks ! " cried aramis , almost in a state of delirium .
" she was forced to return to tours ; she is not faithless ; she still loves me !
come , my friend , come , let me embrace you . happiness almost stifles me ! "
the two friends began to dance around the venerable st . chrysostom , kicking about famously the sheets of the thesis , which had fallen on the floor .
at that moment bazin entered with the spinach and the omelet .
" be off , you wretch ! " cried aramis , throwing his skullcap in his face . " return whence you came ; take back those horrible vegetables , and that poor kickshaw ! order a larded hare , a fat capon , mutton leg dressed with garlic , and four bottles of old burgundy . "
bazin , who looked at his master , without comprehending the cause of this change , in a melancholy manner , allowed the omelet to slip into the spinach , and the spinach onto the floor .
27 the wife of athos
we have now to search for athos , " said dartagnan to the vivacious aramis , when he had informed him of all that had passed since their departure from the capital , and an excellent dinner had made one of them forget his thesis and the other his fatigue .
" do you think , then , that any harm can have happened to him ? " asked aramis . " athos is so cool , so brave , and handles his sword so skillfully . "
yesterday i undertook to employ that cord which you see hanging against the wall , but pain prevented my continuing the pious exercise . "
" when do you mean to set out ? "
" tomorrow at daybreak . sleep as soundly as you can tonight , and tomorrow , if you can , we will take our departure together . "
" till tomorrow , then , " said aramis ; " for iron - nerved as you are , you must need repose . "
the next morning , when dartagnan entered aramis s chamber , he found him at the window .
" what are you looking at ? " asked dartagnan .
" my faith !
i am admiring three magnificent horses which the stable boys are leading about . it would be a pleasure worthy of a prince to travel upon such horses . "
" well , my dear aramis , you may enjoy that pleasure , for one of those three horses is yours . "
" ah , bah ! which ? "
" whichever of the three you like , i have no preference . "
" and the rich caparison , is that mine , too ? "
" without doubt . "
" you laugh , dartagnan . "
" no , i have left off laughing , now that you speak french . "
" what , those rich holsters , that velvet housing , that saddle studded with silver - are they all for me ? "
" for you and nobody else , as the horse which paws the ground is mine , and the other horse , which is caracoling , belongs to athos . "
" peste ! they are three superb animals ! "
" i am glad they please you . "
" why , it must have been the king who made you such a present . "
" certainly it was not the cardinal ; but do nt trouble yourself whence they come , think only that one of the three is your property . "
" i choose that which the red - headed boy is leading . "
" it is yours ! "
" good heaven ! that is enough to drive away all my pains ; i could mount him with thirty balls in my body .
on my soul , handsome stirrups !
hola , bazin , come here this minute . "
bazin appeared on the threshold , dull and spiritless .
" that last order is useless , " interrupted dartagnan ; " there are loaded pistols in your holsters . "
bazin sighed .
" come , monsieur bazin , make yourself easy , " said dartagnan ; " people of all conditions gain the kingdom of heaven . "
ask his lackey how often he has had to prepare lint of him . " " alas ! " sighed bazin .
" i know it , monsieur ; everything is turned topsy - turvy in the world nowadays . "
dartagnan , who , foreseeing such an event , had kept his eye on him , sprang toward him , caught him in his arms , and assisted him to his chamber .
" that s all right , my dear aramis , take care of yourself , " said he ; " i will go alone in search of athos . "
" you are a man of brass , " replied aramis .
aramis smiled .
" i will make verses , " said he .
" yes , i dare say ; verses perfumed with the odor of the billet from the attendant of madame de chevreuse .
teach bazin prosody ; that will console him .
as to the horse , ride him a little every day , and that will accustom you to his maneuvers . "
" oh , make yourself easy on that head , " replied aramis . " you will find me ready to follow you . "
how was he going to find athos ? should he find him at all ?
the position in which he had left him was critical . he probably had succumbed .
this idea , while darkening his brow , drew several sighs from him , and caused him to formulate to himself a few vows of vengeance .
of all his friends , athos was the eldest , and the least resembling him in appearance , in his tastes and sympathies .
yet he entertained a marked preference for this gentleman .
if a repast were on foot , athos presided over it better than any other , placing every guest exactly in the rank which his ancestors had earned for him or that he had made for himself .
he knew what were the rights of the great land owners . he was profoundly versed in hunting and falconry , and had one day when conversing on this great art astonished even louis xiii himself , who took a pride in being considered a past master therein .
like all the great nobles of that period , athos rode and fenced to perfection .
but still further , his education had been so little neglected , even with respect to scholastic studies , so rare at this time among gentlemen , that he smiled at the scraps of latin which aramis sported and which porthos pretended to understand . two or three times , even , to the great astonishment of his friends , he had , when aramis allowed some rudimental error to escape him , replaced a verb in its right tense and a noun in its case .
besides , his probity was irreproachable , in an age in which soldiers compromised so easily with their religion and their consciences , lovers with the rigorous delicacy of our era , and the poor with god s seventh commandment .
this athos , then , was a very extraordinary man .
and yet this nature so distinguished , this creature so beautiful , this essence so fine , was seen to turn insensibly toward material life , as old men turn toward physical and moral imbecility .
athos , in his hours of gloom -- and these hours were frequent -- was extinguished as to the whole of the luminous portion of him , and his brilliant side disappeared as into profound darkness .
then the demigod vanished ; he remained scarcely a man .
his head hanging down , his eye dull , his speech slow and painful , athos would look for hours together at his bottle , his glass , or at grimaud , who , accustomed to obey him by signs , read in the faint glance of his master his least desire , and satisfied it immediately .
if the four friends were assembled at one of these moments , a word , thrown forth occasionally with a violent effort , was the share athos furnished to the conversation .
in exchange for his silence athos drank enough for four , and without appearing to be otherwise affected by wine than by a more marked constriction of the brow and by a deeper sadness .
dartagnan , whose inquiring disposition we are acquainted with , had not -- whatever interest he had in satisfying his curiosity on this subject -- been able to assign any cause for these fits of for the periods of their recurrence .
athos never received any letters ; athos never had concerns which all his friends did not know .
it could not be said that it was wine which produced this sadness ; for in truth he only drank to combat this sadness , which wine however , as we have said , rendered still darker .
this excess of bilious humor could not be attributed to play ; for unlike porthos , who accompanied the variations of chance with songs or oaths , athos when he won remained as unmoved as when he lost .
he had been known , in the circle of the musketeers , to win in one night three thousand pistoles ; to lose them even to the gold - embroidered belt for gala days , win all this again with the addition of a hundred louis , without his beautiful eyebrow being heightened or lowered half a line , without his hands losing their pearly hue , without his conversation , which was cheerful that evening , ceasing to be calm and agreeable .
neither was it , as with our neighbors , the english , an atmospheric influence which darkened his countenance ; for the sadness generally became more intense toward the fine season of the year . june and july were the terrible months with athos .
for the present he had no anxiety . he shrugged his shoulders when people spoke of the future . his secret , then , was in the past , as had often been vaguely said to dartagnan .
this mysterious shade , spread over his whole person , rendered still more interesting the man whose eyes or mouth , even in the most complete intoxication , had never revealed anything , however skillfully questions had been put to him .
" well , " thought dartagnan , " poor athos is perhaps at this moment dead , and dead by my fault -- for it was i who dragged him into this affair , of which he did not know the origin , of which he is ignorant of the result , and from which he can derive no advantage . "
" without reckoning , monsieur , " added planchet to his master s audibly expressed reflections , " that we perhaps owe our lives to him .
do you remember how he cried ,  on , dartagnan , on , i am taken  ?
and when he had discharged his two pistols , what a terrible noise he made with his sword !
one might have said that twenty men , or rather twenty mad devils , were fighting . "
these words redoubled the eagerness of dartagnan , who urged his horse , though he stood in need of no incitement , and they proceeded at a rapid pace .
about eleven oclock in the morning they perceived ameins , and at half past eleven they were at the door of the cursed inn .
dartagnan had often meditated against the perfidious host one of those hearty vengeances which offer consolation while they are hoped for .
he entered the hostelry with his hat pulled over his eyes , his left hand on the pommel of the sword , and cracking his whip with his right hand .
" do you remember me ? " said he to the host , who advanced to greet him .
" i have not that honor , monseigneur , " replied the latter , his eyes dazzled by the brilliant style in which dartagnan traveled .
" what , you do nt know me ? "
" no , monseigneur . "
" well , two words will refresh your memory .
what have you done with that gentleman against whom you had the audacity , about twelve days ago , to make an accusation of passing false money ? "
the host became as pale as death ; for dartagnan had assumed a threatening attitude , and planchet modeled himself after his master .
" ah , monseigneur , do not mention it ! " cried the host , in the most pitiable voice imaginable .
" ah , monseigneur , how dearly have i paid for that fault , unhappy wretch as i am ! "
" that gentleman , i say , what has become of him ? "
" deign to listen to me , monseigneur , and be merciful !
sit down , in mercy ! "
dartagnan , mute with anger and anxiety , took a seat in the threatening attitude of a judge .
planchet glared fiercely over the back of his armchair .
" here is the story , monseigneur , " resumed the trembling host ; " for i now recollect you . it was you who rode off at the moment i had that unfortunate difference with the gentleman you speak of . "
" yes , it was i ; so you may plainly perceive that you have no mercy to expect if you do not tell me the whole truth . "
" condescend to listen to me , and you shall know all . "
" i listen . "
" i had been warned by the authorities that a celebrated coiner of bad money would arrive at my inn , with several of his companions , all disguised as guards or musketeers .
monseigneur , i was furnished with a description of your horses , your lackeys , your countenances -- nothing was omitted . "
" go on , go on ! " said dartagnan , who quickly understood whence such an exact description had come .
" i took then , in conformity with the orders of the authorities , who sent me a reinforcement of six men , such measures as i thought necessary to get possession of the persons of the pretended coiners . "
" again ! " said dartagnan , whose ears chafed terribly under the repetition of this word coiners .
" pardon me , monseigneur , for saying such things , but they form my excuse .
the authorities had terrified me , and you know that an innkeeper must keep on good terms with the authorities . "
" but once again , that gentleman -- where is he ? what has become of him ?
is he dead ? is he living ? "
" patience , monseigneur , we are coming to it .
there happened then that which you know , and of which your precipitate departure , " added the host , with an acuteness that did not escape dartagnan , " appeared to authorize the issue .
that gentleman , your friend , defended himself desperately .
his lackey , who , by an unforeseen piece of ill luck , had quarreled with the officers , disguised as stable lads-- "
" miserable scoundrel ! " cried dartagnan , " you were all in the plot , then ! and i really do nt know what prevents me from exterminating you all . "
" alas , monseigneur , we were not in the plot , as you will soon see .
monsieur your friend ( pardon for not calling him by the honorable name which no doubt he bears , but we do not know that name ) , monsieur your friend , having disabled two men with his pistols , retreated fighting with his sword , with which he disabled one of my men , and stunned me with a blow of the flat side of it . "
" you villain , will you finish ? " cried dartagnan , " athos -- what has become of athos ? "
" while fighting and retreating , as i have told monseigneur , he found the door of the cellar stairs behind him , and as the door was open , he took out the key , and barricaded himself inside .
as we were sure of finding him there , we left him alone . "
" yes , " said dartagnan , " you did not really wish to kill ; you only wished to imprison him . " " good god !
to imprison him , monseigneur ? why , he imprisoned himself , i swear to you he did .
in the first place he had made rough work of it ; one man was killed on the spot , and two others were severely wounded .
the dead man and the two wounded were carried off by their comrades , and i have heard nothing of either of them since .
as for myself , as soon as i recovered my senses i went to monsieur the governor , to whom i related all that had passed , and asked , what i should do with my prisoner .
it appears that i had made a mistake , monsieur , that i had arrested the wrong person , and that he whom i ought to have arrested had escaped . "
" but athos ! " cried dartagnan , whose impatience was increased by the disregard of the authorities , " athos , where is he ? "
" as i was anxious to repair the wrongs i had done the prisoner , " resumed the innkeeper , " i took my way straight to the cellar in order to set him at liberty .
ah , monsieur , he was no longer a man , he was a devil !
to my offer of liberty , he replied that it was nothing but a snare , and that before he came out he intended to impose his own conditions .
i told him very humbly -- for i could not conceal from myself the scrape i had got into by laying hands on one of his majesty s musketeers -- i told him i was quite ready to submit to his conditions .
"  in the first place ,  said he ,  i wish my lackey placed with me , fully armed . 
we hastened to obey this order ; for you will please to understand , monsieur , we were disposed to do everything your friend could desire .
monsieur grimaud ( he told us his name , although he does not talk much)--monsieur grimaud , then , went down to the cellar , wounded as he was ; then his master , having admitted him , barricaded the door afresh , and ordered us to remain quietly in our own bar . "
" but where is athos now ? " cried dartagnan . " where is athos ? "
" in the cellar , monsieur . "
" what , you scoundrel ! have you kept him in the cellar all this time ? "
" merciful heaven !
no , monsieur !
we keep him in the cellar ! you do not know what he is about in the cellar . ah !
" then he is there ? i shall find him there ? "
" without doubt you will , monsieur ; he persists in remaining there .
we every day pass through the air hole some bread at the end of a fork , and some meat when he asks for it ; but alas ! it is not of bread and meat of which he makes the greatest consumption .
i once endeavored to go down with two of my servants ; but he flew into terrible rage .
i heard the noise he made in loading his pistols , and his servant in loading his musketoon .
then , when we asked them what were their intentions , the master replied that he had forty charges to fire , and that he and his lackey would fire to the last one before he would allow a single soul of us to set foot in the cellar .
upon this i went and complained to the governor , who replied that i only had what i deserved , and that it would teach me to insult honorable gentlemen who took up their abode in my house . "
" so that since that time-- " replied dartagnan , totally unable to refrain from laughing at the pitiable face of the host .
" so from that time , monsieur , " continued the latter , " we have led the most miserable life imaginable ; for you must know , monsieur , that all our provisions are in the cellar . there is our wine in bottles , and our wine in casks ; the beer , the oil , and the spices , the bacon , and sausages . and as we are prevented from going down there , we are forced to refuse food and drink to the travelers who come to the house ; so that our hostelry is daily going to ruin .
if your friend remains another week in my cellar i shall be a ruined man . "
" and not more than justice , either , you ass !
could you not perceive by our appearance that we were people of quality , and not coiners -- say ? "
" yes , monsieur , you are right , " said the host .
" somebody has disturbed him , without doubt , " said dartagnan .
" but he must be disturbed , " cried the host ; " here are two english gentlemen just arrived . "
" well ? "
" well , the english like good wine , as you may know , monsieur ; these have asked for the best .
my wife has perhaps requested permission of monsieur athos to go into the cellar to satisfy these gentlemen ; and he , as usual , has refused .
ah , good heaven ! there is the hullabaloo louder than ever ! "
dartagnan , in fact , heard a great noise on the side next the cellar . he rose , and preceded by the host wringing his hands , and followed by planchet with his musketoon ready for use , he approached the scene of action .
the two gentlemen were exasperated ; they had had a long ride , and were dying with hunger and thirst .
" but this is tyranny ! " cried one of them , in very good french , though with a foreign accent , " that this madman will not allow these good people access to their own wine !
" softly , gentlemen ! " said dartagnan , drawing his pistols from his belt , " you will kill nobody , if you please ! "
" good , good ! " cried the calm voice of athos , from the other side of the door , " let them just come in , these devourers of little children , and we shall see ! "
there was a moment of silence ; but at length the two englishmen felt ashamed to draw back , and the angrier one descended the five or six steps which led to the cellar , and gave a kick against the door enough to split a wall .
" planchet , " said dartagnan , cocking his pistols , " i will take charge of the one at the top ; you look to the one below .
ah , gentlemen , you want battle ; and you shall have it . "
" yes , " cried dartagnan , raising his voice in turn , " i am here , my friend . "
" ah , good , then , " replied athos , " we will teach them , these door breakers ! "
the gentlemen had drawn their swords , but they found themselves taken between two fires . they still hesitated an instant ; but , as before , pride prevailed , and a second kick split the door from bottom to top .
" stand on one side , dartagnan , stand on one side , " cried athos . " i am going to fire ! "
" gentlemen , " exclaimed dartagnan , whom reflection never abandoned , " gentlemen , think of what you are about .
patience , athos !
you are running your heads into a very silly affair ; you will be riddled .
my lackey and i will have three shots at you , and you will get as many from the cellar . you will then have our swords , with which , i can assure you , my friend and i can play tolerably well .
let me conduct your business and my own .
you shall soon have something to drink ; i give you my word . "
" if there is any left , " grumbled the jeering voice of athos .
the host felt a cold sweat creep down his back .
" how !  if there is any left !  " murmured he .
" what the devil ! there must be plenty left , " replied dartagnan . " be satisfied of that ; these two can not have drunk all the cellar .
gentlemen , return your swords to their scabbards . "
" well , provided you replace your pistols in your belt . "
" willingly . "
and dartagnan set the example .
then , turning toward planchet , he made him a sign to uncock his musketoon .
the englishmen , convinced of these peaceful proceedings , sheathed their swords grumblingly .
the history of athos s imprisonment was then related to them ; and as they were really gentlemen , they pronounced the host in the wrong .
" now , gentlemen , " said dartagnan , " go up to your room again ; and in ten minutes , i will answer for it , you shall have all you desire . "
the englishmen bowed and went upstairs .
" now i am alone , my dear athos , " said dartagnan ; " open the door , i beg of you . "
" instantly , " said athos .
then was heard a great noise of fagots being removed and of the groaning of posts ; these were the counterscarps and bastions of athos , which the besieged himself demolished .
an instant after , the broken door was removed , and the pale face of athos appeared , who with a rapid glance took a survey of the surroundings .
dartagnan threw himself on his neck and embraced him tenderly . he then tried to draw him from his moist abode , but to his surprise he perceived that athos staggered .
" you are wounded , " said he . " i !
not at all . i am dead drunk , that s all , and never did a man more strongly set about getting so . by the lord , my good host !
i must at least have drunk for my part a hundred and fifty bottles . "
" mercy ! " cried the host , " if the lackey has drunk only half as much as the master , i am a ruined man . "
" grimaud is a well - bred lackey . he would never think of faring in the same manner as his master ; he only drank from the cask . hark ! i do nt think he put the faucet in again .
do you hear it ? it is running now . "
dartagnan burst into a laugh which changed the shiver of the host into a burning fever .
in the meantime , grimaud appeared in his turn behind his master , with the musketoon on his shoulder , and his head shaking . like one of those drunken satyrs in the pictures of rubens .
he was moistened before and behind with a greasy liquid which the host recognized as his best olive oil .
the four crossed the public room and proceeded to take possession of the best apartment in the house , which dartagnan occupied with authority .
in the meantime the host and his wife hurried down with lamps into the cellar , which had so long been interdicted to them and where a frightful spectacle awaited them .
" the image of devastation and death , " as the ancient poet says , " reigned as over a field of battle . "
of fifty large sausages , suspended from the joists , scarcely ten remained .
then the lamentations of the host and hostess pierced the vault of the cellar . dartagnan himself was moved by them .
athos did not even turn his head .
to grief succeeded rage .
the host armed himself with a spit , and rushed into the chamber occupied by the two friends .
" some wine ! " said athos , on perceiving the host .
i am a ruined man , lost , destroyed ! " " bah , " said athos , " we were always dry . "
" if you had been contented with drinking , well and good ; but you have broken all the bottles . "
" you pushed me upon a heap which rolled down .
that was your fault . "
" all my oil is lost ! "
" oil is a sovereign balm for wounds ; and my poor grimaud here was obliged to dress those you had inflicted on him . "
" all my sausages are gnawed ! "
" there is an enormous quantity of rats in that cellar . "
" you shall pay me for all this , " cried the exasperated host .
" triple ass ! " said athos , rising ; but he sank down again immediately .
the host drew back and burst into tears .
" this will teach you , " said dartagnan , " to treat the guests god sends you in a more courteous fashion . "
" god ? say the devil ! "
" my dear friend , " said dartagnan , " if you annoy us in this manner we will all four go and shut ourselves up in your cellar , and we will see if the mischief is as great as you say . "
" oh , gentlemen , " said the host , " i have been wrong . i confess it , but pardon to every sin ! you are gentlemen , and i am a poor innkeeper . you will have pity on me . "
" ah , if you speak in that way , " said athos , " you will break my heart , and the tears will flow from my eyes as the wine flowed from the cask .
we are not such devils as we appear to be .
come hither , and let us talk . "
the host approached with hesitation .
" come hither , i say , and do nt be afraid , " continued athos .
" at the very moment when i was about to pay you , i had placed my purse on the table . "
" yes , monsieur . "
" that purse contained sixty pistoles ; where is it ? "
" deposited with the justice ; they said it was bad money . "
" very well ; get me my purse back and keep the sixty pistoles . "
" but monseigneur knows very well that justice never lets go that which it once lays hold of .
if it were bad money , there might be some hopes ; but unfortunately , those were all good pieces . "
" come , " said dartagnan , " let us inquire further . athos s horse , where is that ? "
" in the stable . "
" how much is it worth ? "
" fifty pistoles at most . "
" it s worth eighty . take it , and there ends the matter . "
" what , " cried athos , " are you selling my horse -- my bajazet ? and pray upon what shall i make my campaign ; upon grimaud ? "
" i have brought you another , " said dartagnan .
" another ? "
" and a magnificent one ! " cried the host .
" well , since there is another finer and younger , why , you may take the old one ; and let us drink . "
" what ? " asked the host , quite cheerful again .
" some of that at the bottom , near the laths . there are twenty - five bottles of it left ; all the rest were broken by my fall .
bring six of them . "
" why , this man is a cask ! " said the host , aside . " if he only remains here a fortnight , and pays for what he drinks , i shall soon re - establish my business . "
" and do nt forget , " said dartagnan , " to bring up four bottles of the same sort for the two english gentlemen . "
" and now , " said athos , " while they bring the wine , tell me , dartagnan , what has become of the others , come ! "
dartagnan related how he had found porthos in bed with a strained knee , and aramis at a table between two theologians .
as he finished , the host entered with the wine ordered and a ham which , fortunately for him , had been left out of the cellar .
" that s well ! " said athos , filling his glass and that of his friend ; " here s to porthos and aramis ! but you , dartagnan , what is the matter with you , and what has happened to you personally ?
you have a sad air . "
" alas , " said dartagnan , " it is because i am the most unfortunate . "
" tell me . "
" presently , " said dartagnan .
" presently !
and why presently ?
because you think i am drunk ? dartagnan , remember this !
my ideas are never so clear as when i have had plenty of wine .
speak , then , i am all ears . "
dartagnan related his adventure with mme . bonacieux .
athos listened to him without a frown ; and when he had finished , said , " trifles , only trifles ! "
that was his favorite word .
" you always say trifles , my dear athos ! " said dartagnan , " and that come very ill from you , who have never loved . "
the drink - deadened eye of athos flashed out , but only for a moment ; it became as dull and vacant as before .
" that s true , " said he , quietly , " for my part i have never loved . "
" acknowledge , then , you stony heart , " said dartagnan , " that you are wrong to be so hard upon us tender hearts . "
" tender hearts ! pierced hearts ! " said athos .
" what do you say ? "
" i say that love is a lottery in which he who wins , wins death !
you are very fortunate to have lost , believe me , my dear dartagnan .
and if i have any counsel to give , it is , always lose ! "
" she seemed to love me so ! "
" she seemed , did she ? "
" oh , she did love me ! "
" you child , why , there is not a man who has not believed , as you do , that his mistress loved him , and there lives not a man who has not been deceived by his mistress . "
" except you , athos , who never had one . "
" that s true , " said athos , after a moment s silence , " that s true ! i never had one !
let us drink ! "
" but then , philosopher that you are , " said dartagnan , " instruct me , support me . i stand in need of being taught and consoled . "
" consoled for what ? "
" for my misfortune . "
" your misfortune is laughable , " said athos , shrugging his shoulders ; " i should like to know what you would say if i were to relate to you a real tale of love ! "
" which has happened to you ? "
" or one of my friends , what matters ? "
" tell it , athos , tell it . "
" better if i drink . "
" drink and relate , then . "
" not a bad idea ! " said athos , emptying and refilling his glass . " the two things agree marvelously well . "
" i am all attention , " said dartagnan .
athos collected himself , and in proportion as he did so , dartagnan saw that he became pale . he was at that period of intoxication in which vulgar drinkers fall on the floor and go to sleep .
he kept himself upright and dreamed , without sleeping .
this somnambulism of drunkenness had something frightful in it .
" you particularly wish it ? " asked he .
" i pray for it , " said dartagnan .
" be it then as you desire .
one of my friends -- one of my friends , please to observe , not myself , " said athos , interrupting himself with a melancholy smile , " one of the counts of my province -- that is to say , of berry -- noble as a dandolo or a montmorency , at twenty - five years of age fell in love with a girl of sixteen , beautiful as fancy can paint .
through the ingenuousness of her age beamed an ardent mind , not of the woman , but of the poet . she did not please ; she intoxicated . she lived in a small town with her brother , who was a curate .
both had recently come into the country . they came nobody knew whence ; but when seeing her so lovely and her brother so pious , nobody thought of asking whence they came .
they were said , however , to be of good extraction .
my friend , who was seigneur of the country , might have seduced her , or taken her by force , at his will -- for he was master . who would have come to the assistance of two strangers , two unknown persons ?
unfortunately he was an honorable man ; he married her .
the fool ! the ass !
the idiot ! " " how so , if he love her ? " asked dartagnan .
" wait , " said athos .
" he took her to his chateau , and made her the first lady in the province ; and in justice it must be allowed that she supported her rank becomingly . "
" well ? " asked dartagnan .
" how can i tell ? " said dartagnan .
" a fleur - de - lis , " said athos .
" she was branded . "
athos emptied at a single draught the glass he held in his hand .
" horror ! " cried dartagnan . " what do you tell me ? "
" truth , my friend .
" and what did the count do ? "
" the count was of the highest nobility .
" heavens , athos , a murder ? " cried dartagnan .
" no less , " said athos , as pale as a corpse .
then he let his head sink upon his two hands , while dartagnan stood before him , stupefied .
" that has cured me of beautiful , poetical , and loving women , " said athos , after a considerable pause , raising his head , and forgetting to continue the fiction of the count .
" god grant you as much !
let us drink . "
" then she is dead ? " stammered dartagnan .
" parbleu ! " said athos .
" but hold out your glass .
some ham , my boy , or we ca nt drink . "
" and her brother ? " added dartagnan , timidly .
" her brother ? " replied athos .
" yes , the priest . "
" was it ever known who this miserable fellow was ? "
" he was doubtless the first lover and accomplice of the fair lady . a worthy man , who had pretended to be a curate for the purpose of getting his mistress married , and securing her a position .
he has been hanged and quartered , i hope . "
" my god , my god ! " cried dartagnan , quite stunned by the relation of this horrible adventure .
" taste some of this ham , dartagnan ; it is exquisite , " said athos , cutting a slice , which he placed on the young man s plate .
dartagnan could no longer endure this conversation , which had made him bewildered . allowing his head to sink upon his two hands , he pretended to sleep .
" these young fellows can none of them drink , " said athos , looking at him with pity , " and yet this is one of the best ! "
28 the return
dartagnan was astounded by the terrible confidence of athos ; yet many things appeared very obscure to him in this half revelation . in the first place it had been made by a man quite drunk to one who was half drunk ; and yet , in spite of the incertainty which the vapor of three or four bottles of burgundy carries with it to the brain , dartagnan , when awaking on the following morning , had all the words of athos as present to his memory as if they then fell from his mouth -- they had been so impressed upon his mind .
all this doubt only gave rise to a more lively desire of arriving at a certainty , and he went into his friend s chamber with a fixed determination of renewing the conversation of the preceding evening ; but he found athos quite himself again -- that is to say , the most shrewd and impenetrable of men .
besides which , the musketeer , after having exchanged a hearty shake of the hand with him , broached the matter first .
" i was pretty drunk yesterday , dartagnan , " said he , " i can tell that by my tongue , which was swollen and hot this morning , and by my pulse , which was very tremulous . i wager that i uttered a thousand extravagances . "
while saying this he looked at his friend with an earnestness that embarrassed him .
" no , " replied dartagnan , " if i recollect well what you said , it was nothing out of the common way . "
" ah , you surprise me .
i thought i had told you a most lamentable story . "
and he looked at the young man as if he would read the bottom of his heart .
" my faith , " said dartagnan , " it appears that i was more drunk than you , since i remember nothing of the kind . "
that is my failing -- a capital failing , i admit ; but with that exception , i am a good drinker . "
athos spoke this in so natural a manner that dartagnan was shaken in his conviction .
" it is that , then , " replied the young man , anxious to find out the truth , " it is that , then , i remember as we remember a dream . we were speaking of hanging . "
" yes , yes , " replied dartagnan . " i remember now ; yes , it was about -- stop a minute -- yes , it was about a woman . "
" that s it , " replied athos , becoming almost livid ; " that is my grand story of the fair lady , and when i relate that , i must be very drunk . "
" yes , that was it , " said dartagnan , " the story of a tall , fair lady , with blue eyes . "
" yes , who was hanged . "
" by her husband , who was a nobleman of your acquaintance , " continued dartagnan , looking intently at athos .
" well , you see how a man may compromise himself when he does not know what he says , " replied athos , shrugging his shoulders as if he thought himself an object of pity .
" i certainly never will get drunk again , dartagnan ; it is too bad a habit . "
dartagnan remained silent ; and then changing the conversation all at once , athos said :
" by the by , i thank you for the horse you have brought me . "
" is it to your mind ? " asked dartagnan .
" yes ; but it is not a horse for hard work . "
" you are mistaken ; i rode him nearly ten leagues in less than an hour and a half , and he appeared no more distressed than if he had only made the tour of the place st . sulpice . "
" ah , you begin to awaken my regret . "
" regret ? "
" yes ; i have parted with him . "
i drew near , and found he was bidding a hundred pistoles for a chestnut nag .  pardieu ,  said i ,  my good gentleman , i have a horse to sell , too .   ay , and a very fine one !
i saw him yesterday ; your friend s lackey was leading him .   do you think he is worth a hundred pistoles ?   yes !
no sooner said than done , and i lost the horse .
ah , ah !
dartagnan looked much disconcerted .
" this vexes you ? " said athos .
" well , i must confess it does , " replied dartagnan .
" that horse was to have identified us in the day of battle .
it was a pledge , a remembrance .
athos , you have done wrong . "
" but , my dear friend , put yourself in my place , " replied the musketeer . " i was hipped to death ; and still further , upon my honor , i do nt like english horses .
if it is only to be recognized , why the saddle will suffice for that ; it is quite remarkable enough .
as to the horse , we can easily find some excuse for its disappearance .
why the devil ! a horse is mortal ; suppose mine had had the glanders or the farcy ? "
dartagnan did not smile .
" what else have you done . "
" after having lost my own horse , nine against ten -- see how near -- i formed an idea of staking yours . "
" yes ; but you stopped at the idea , i hope ? "
" no ; for i put it in execution that very minute . "
" and the consequence ? " said dartagnan , in great anxiety .
" i threw , and i lost . "
" what , my horse ? "
" your horse , seven against eight ; a point short -- you know the proverb . "
" athos , you are not in your right senses , i swear . "
" my dear lad , that was yesterday , when i was telling you silly stories , it was proper to tell me that , and not this morning .
i lost him then , with all his appointments and furniture . "
" really , this is frightful . "
" well , but what else could you play for ? you had nothing left ? "
" oh , yes , my friend ; there was still that diamond left which sparkles on your finger , and which i had observed yesterday . "
" this diamond ! " said dartagnan , placing his hand eagerly on his ring .
" i hope , " said dartagnan , half dead with fright , " you made no mention of my diamond ? "
" on the contrary , my dear friend , this diamond became our only resource ; with it i might regain our horses and their harnesses , and even money to pay our expenses on the road . "
" athos , you make me tremble ! " cried dartagnan .
" i mentioned your diamond then to my adversary , who had likewise remarked it .
what the devil , my dear , do you think you can wear a star from heaven on your finger , and nobody observe it ?
impossible ! "
" go on , go on , my dear fellow ! " said dartagnan ; " for upon my honor , you will kill me with your indifference . "
" we divided , then , this diamond into ten parts of a hundred pistoles each . "
" you are laughing at me , and want to try me ! " said dartagnan , whom anger began to take by the hair , as minerva takes achilles , in the illiad .
i had been fifteen days without seeing a human face , and had been left to brutalize myself in the company of bottles . "
" that was no reason for staking my diamond ! " replied dartagnan , closing his hand with a nervous spasm .
" hear the end .
the number thirteen was always fatal to me ; it was on the thirteenth of july that-- "
" ventrebleu ! " cried dartagnan , rising from the table , the story of the present day making him forget that of the preceding one .
" patience ! " said athos ; " i had a plan .
the englishman was an original ; i had seen him conversing that morning with grimaud , and grimaud had told me that he had made him proposals to enter into his service .
i staked grimaud , the silent grimaud , divided into ten portions . "
" well , what next ? " said dartagnan , laughing in spite of himself .
" grimaud himself , understand ; and with the ten parts of grimaud , which are not worth a ducatoon , i regained the diamond .
tell me , now , if persistence is not a virtue ? " " my faith !
but this is droll , " cried dartagnan , consoled , and holding his sides with laughter .
" you may guess , finding the luck turned , that i again staked the diamond . "
" the devil ! " said dartagnan , becoming angry again .
" i won back your harness , then your horse , then my harness , then my horse , and then i lost again .
in brief , i regained your harness and then mine .
that s where we are .
that was a superb throw , so i left off there . "
dartagnan breathed as if the whole hostelry had been removed from his breast .
" then the diamond is safe ? " said he , timidly .
" intact , my dear friend ; besides the harness of your bucephalus and mine . "
" but what is the use of harnesses without horses ? "
" i have an idea about them . "
" athos , you make me shudder . "
" listen to me . you have not played for a long time , dartagnan . "
" and i have no inclination to play . "
" swear to nothing .
you have not played for a long time , i said ; you ought , then , to have a good hand . "
" well , what then ? "
" well ; the englishman and his companion are still here .
i remarked that he regretted the horse furniture very much .
you appear to think much of your horse .
in your place i would stake the furniture against the horse . "
" but he will not wish for only one harness . "
" stake both , pardieu ! i am not selfish , as you are . "
" you would do so ? " said dartagnan , undecided , so strongly did the confidence of athos begin to prevail , in spite of himself .
" on my honor , in one single throw . "
" but having lost the horses , i am particularly anxious to preserve the harnesses . "
" stake your diamond , then . "
" this ? that s another matter . never , never ! "
" the englishman is overflowing with pistoles .
good lord , try one throw ! one throw is soon made ! "
" and if i lose ? "
" you will win . "
" but if i lose ? "
" well , you will surrender the harnesses . "
" have with you for one throw ! " said dartagnan .
athos went in quest of the englishman , whom he found in the stable , examining the harnesses with a greedy eye .
the opportunity was good .
he proposed the conditions -- the two harnesses , either against one horse or a hundred pistoles .
the englishman calculated fast ; the two harnesses were worth three hundred pistoles . he consented .
the englishman , quite triumphant , did not even give himself the trouble to shake the dice .
" hold , hold , hold ! " said athos , wit his quiet tone ; " that throw of the dice is extraordinary . i have not seen such a one four times in my life . two aces ! "
the englishman looked , and was seized with astonishment . dartagnan looked , and was seized with pleasure .
" yes , " continued athos , " four times only ; once at the house of monsieur crequy ; another time at my own house in the country , in my chateau at -- when i had a chateau ; a third time at monsieur de treville s where it surprised us all ; and the fourth time at a cabaret , where it fell to my lot , and where i lost a hundred louis and a supper on it . "
" then monsieur takes his horse back again , " said the englishman .
" certainly , " said dartagnan .
" then there is no revenge ? "
" our conditions said ,  no revenge ,  you will please to recollect . "
" that is true ; the horse shall be restored to your lackey , monsieur . "
" a moment , " said athos ; " with your permission , monsieur , i wish to speak a word with my friend . "
" say on . "
athos drew dartagnan aside .
" well , tempter , what more do you want with me ? " said dartagnan . " you want me to throw again , do you not ? "
" no , i would wish you to reflect . "
" on what ? "
" you mean to take your horse ? " " without doubt . "
" you are wrong , then .
i would take the hundred pistoles . you know you have staked the harnesses against the horse or a hundred pistoles , at your choice . "
" yes . "
" well , then , i repeat , you are wrong .
what is the use of one horse for us two ?
for my part , i should not hesitate a moment ; i should take the hundred pistoles . we want money for our return to paris . "
" and there again you are wrong .
" but how shall we get back ? "
" upon our lackey s horses , pardieu . anybody may see by our bearing that we are people of condition . "
" pretty figures we shall cut on ponies while aramis and porthos caracole on their steeds . "
" aramis !
porthos ! " cried athos , and laughed aloud .
" what is it ? " asked dartagnan , who did not at all comprehend the hilarity of his friend .
" nothing , nothing ! go on ! "
" your advice , then ? "
we have undergone a great deal of fatigue , remember , and a little rest will do no harm . " " i rest ?
oh , no , athos . once in paris , i shall prosecute my search for that unfortunate woman ! "
take the hundred pistoles , my friend ; take the hundred pistoles ! "
dartagnan only required one reason to be satisfied .
this last reason appeared convincing .
besides , he feared that by resisting longer he should appear selfish in the eyes of athos . he acquiesced , therefore , and chose the hundred pistoles , which the englishman paid down on the spot .
they then determined to depart .
peace with the landlord , in addition to athos s old horse , cost six pistoles . dartagnan and athos took the nags of planchet and grimaud , and the two lackeys started on foot , carrying the saddles on their heads .
however ill our two friends were mounted , they were soon far in advance of their servants , and arrived at creveccoeur .
from a distance they perceived aramis , seated in a melancholy manner at his window , looking out , like sister anne , at the dust in the horizon .
" hola , aramis !
" ah , is that you , dartagnan , and you , athos ? " said the young man .
life itself may be resolved into three words : erat , est , fuit . "
" which means-- " said dartagnan , who began to suspect the truth .
" which means that i have just been duped - sixty louis for a horse which by the manner of his gait can do at least five leagues an hour . "
dartagnan and athos laughed aloud .
" my dear dartagnan , " said aramis , " do nt be too angry with me , i beg . necessity has no law ; besides , i am the person punished , as that rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis , at least .
ah , you fellows are good managers ! you ride on our lackey s horses , and have your own gallant steeds led along carefully by hand , at short stages . "
the cart was returning empty to paris , and the two lackeys had agreed , for their transport , to slake the wagoner s thirst along the route .
" what is this ? " said aramis , on seeing them arrive . " nothing but saddles ? "
" now do you understand ? " said athos .
" my friends , that s exactly like me !
i retained my harness by instinct . hola , bazin !
" my dear fellow , i invited them to a dinner the next day , " replied aramis .
" they have some capital wine here -- please to observe that in passing .
" since then , " continued aramis , " i have lived very agreeably .
i have begun a poem in verses of one syllable . that is rather difficult , but the merit in all things consists in the difficulty . the matter is gallant .
i will read you the first canto . it has four hundred lines , and lasts a minute . "
" my faith , my dear aramis , " said dartagnan , who detested verses almost as much as he did latin , " add to the merit of the difficulty that of the brevity , and you are sure that your poem will at least have two merits . "
" you will see , " continued aramis , " that it breathes irreproachable passion .
and so , my friends , we return to paris ? bravo !
i am ready . we are going to rejoin that good fellow , porthos . so much the better .
to see him so self - satisfied reconciles me with myself .
i am sure he will look like the great mogul ! "
they made a halt for an hour to refresh their horses .
they found him up , less pale than when dartagnan left him after his first visit , and seated at a table on which , though he was alone , was spread enough for four persons . this dinner consisted of meats nicely dressed , choice wines , and superb fruit .
" ah , pardieu ! " said he , rising , " you come in the nick of time , gentlemen . i was just beginning the soup , and you will dine with me . "
" oh , oh ! " said dartagnan , " mousqueton has not caught these bottles with his lasso . besides , here is a piquant fricandeau and a fillet of beef . "
" i am recruiting myself , " said porthos , " i am recruiting myself . nothing weakens a man more than these devilish strains .
" but this dinner was not intended for you alone , porthos ? " said aramis .
" no , " said porthos , " i expected some gentlemen of the neighborhood , who have just sent me word they could not come . you will take their places and i shall not lose by the exchange .
hola , mousqueton , seats , and order double the bottles ! "
" do you know what we are eating here ? " said athos , at the end of ten minutes .
" pardieu ! " replied dartagnan , " for my part , i am eating veal garnished with shrimps and vegetables . "
" and i some lamb chops , " said porthos .
" and i a plain chicken , " said aramis .
" you are all mistaken , gentlemen , " answered athos , gravely ; " you are eating horse . "
" eating what ? " said dartagnan .
" horse ! " said aramis , with a grimace of disgust .
porthos alone made no reply .
" yes , horse . are we not eating a horse , porthos ?
and perhaps his saddle , therewith . "
" no , gentlemen , i have kept the harness , " said porthos .
" my faith , " said aramis , " we are all alike . one would think we had tipped the wink . "
" what could i do ? " said porthos . " this horse made my visitors ashamed of theirs , and i do nt like to humiliate people . "
" then your duchess is still at the waters ? " asked dartagnan .
" still , " replied porthos .
" and , my faith , the governor of the province -- one of the gentlemen i expected today -- seemed to have such a wish for him , that i gave him to him . "
" gave him ? " cried dartagnan .
" my god , yes , gave , that is the word , " said porthos ; " for the animal was worth at least a hundred and fifty louis , and the stingy fellow would only give me eighty . "
" without the saddle ? " said aramis .
" yes , without the saddle . "
" you will observe , gentlemen , " said athos , " that porthos has made the best bargain of any of us . "
and then commenced a roar of laughter in which they all joined , to the astonishment of poor porthos ; but when he was informed of the cause of their hilarity , he shared it vociferously according to his custom .
" there is one comfort , we are all in cash , " said dartagnan .
" well , for my part , " said athos , " i found aramis s spanish wine so good that i sent on a hamper of sixty bottles of it in the wagon with the lackeys . that has weakened my purse . "
" and i , " said aramis , " imagined that i had given almost my last sou to the church of montdidier and the jesuits of amiens , with whom i had made engagements which i ought to have kept . i have ordered masses for myself , and for you , gentlemen , which will be said , gentlemen , for which i have not the least doubt you will be marvelously benefited . "
" ay , ay ! " said athos , exchanging a smile with dartagnan and aramis , " it is very clear you acted nobly with regard to the poor lad ; that is like a good master . "
" in short , " said porthos , " when all my expenses are paid , i shall have , at most , thirty crowns left . "
" and i about ten pistoles , " said aramis .
" well , then it appears that we are the croesuses of the society .
how much have you left of your hundred pistoles , dartagnan ? "
" of my hundred pistoles ?
why , in the first place i gave you fifty . "
" you think so ? "
" pardieu ! " " ah , that is true .
i recollect . " " then i paid the host six . "
" what a brute of a host ! why did you give him six pistoles ? "
" you told me to give them to him . "
" it is true ; i am too good - natured .
in brief , how much remains ? "
" twenty - five pistoles , " said dartagnan .
" and i , " said athos , taking some small change from his pocket , " i-- " " you ?
nothing ! "
" my faith ! so little that it is not worth reckoning with the general stock . "
" now , then , let us calculate how much we posses in all . " " porthos ? "
" thirty crowns . "
" aramis ? "
" ten pistoles . "
" and you , dartagnan ? "
" twenty - five . "
" that makes in all ? " said athos .
" four hundred and seventy - five livres , " said dartagnan , who reckoned like archimedes .
" on our arrival in paris , we shall still have four hundred , besides the harnesses , " said porthos .
" but our troop horses ? " said aramis .
" let us dine , then , " said porthos ; " it is getting cold . "
the friends , at ease with regard to the future , did honor to the repast , the remains of which were abandoned to mousqueton , bazin , planchet , and grimaud .
on arriving in paris , dartagnan found a letter from m. de treville , which informed him that , at his request , the king had promised that he should enter the company of the musketeers .
as this was the height of dartagnan s worldly ambition -- apart , be it well understood , from his desire of finding mme . bonacieux -- he ran , full of joy , to seek his comrades , whom he had left only half an hour before , but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied .
they were assembled in council at the residence of athos , which always indicated an event of some gravity .
m. de treville had intimated to them his majesty s fixed intention to open the campaign on the first of may , and they must immediately prepare their outfits .
the four philosophers looked at one another in a state of bewilderment . m. de treville never jested in matters relating to discipline .
" and what do you reckon your outfit will cost ? " said dartagnan .
" four times fifteen makes sixty -- six thousand livres , " said athos .
" it seems to me , " said dartagnan , " with a thousand livres each -- i do not speak as a spartan , but as a procurator-- "
this word procurator roused porthos .
" stop , " said he , " i have an idea . "
" well , that s something , for i have not the shadow of one , " said athos coolly ; " but as to dartagnan , gentlemen , the idea of belonging to ours has driven him out of his senses . a thousand livres ! for my part , i declare i want two thousand . "
" four times two makes eight , " then said aramis ; " it is eight thousand that we want to complete our outfits , toward which , it is true , we have already the saddles . "
" besides , " said athos , waiting till dartagnan , who went to thank monsieur de treville , had shut the door , " besides , there is that beautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend .
what the devil ! dartagnan is too good a comrade to leave his brothers in embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king on his finger . "
29 hunting for the equipments
the most preoccupied of the four friends was certainly dartagnan , although he , in his quality of guardsman , would be much more easily equipped than messieurs the musketeers , who were all of high rank ; but our gascon cadet was , as may have been observed , of a provident and almost avaricious character , and with that ( explain the contradiction ) so vain as almost to rival porthos .
to this preoccupation of his vanity , dartagnan at this moment joined an uneasiness much less selfish .
notwithstanding all his inquiries respecting mme . bonacieux , he could obtain no intelligence of her . m. de treville had spoken of her to the queen . the queen was ignorant where the mercer s young wife was , but had promised to have her sought for ; but this promise was very vague and did not at all reassure dartagnan .
athos did not leave his chamber ; he made up his mind not to take a single step to equip himself .
" we have still fifteen days before us , " said he to his friends , " well , if at the end of a fortnight i have found nothing , or rather if nothing has come to find me , as i , too good a catholic to kill myself with a pistol bullet , i will seek a good quarrel with four of his eminence s guards or with eight englishmen , and i will fight until one of them has killed me , which , considering the number , can not fail to happen .
it will then be said of me that i died for the king ; so that i shall have performed my duty without the expense of an outfit . "
porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him , tossing his head and repeating , " i shall follow up on my idea . "
aramis , anxious and negligently dressed , said nothing .
it may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in the community .
the lackeys on their part , like the coursers of hippolytus , shared the sadness of their masters .
mousqueton collected a store of crusts ; bazin , who had always been inclined to devotion , never quit the churches ; planchet watched the flight of flies ; and grimaud , whom the general distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master , heaved sighs enough to soften the stones .
the three friends -- for , as we have said , athos had sworn not to stir a foot to equip himself -- went out early in the morning , and returned late at night .
they wandered about the streets , looking at the pavement as if to see whether the passengers had not left a purse behind them .
they might have been supposed to be following tracks , so observant were they wherever they went .
when they met they looked desolately at one another , as much as to say , " have you found anything ? "
however , as porthos had first found an idea , and had thought of it earnestly afterward , he was the first to act .
he was a man of execution , this worthy porthos .
dartagnan perceived him one day walking toward the church of st . leu , and followed him instinctively . he entered , after having twisted his mustache and elongated his imperial , which always announced on his part the most triumphant resolutions .
as dartagnan took some precautions to conceal himself , porthos believed he had not been seen . dartagnan entered behind him .
there happened to be a sermon , which made the church very full of people .
dartagnan observed , on the bench nearest to the pillar against which porthos leaned , a sort of ripe beauty , rather yellow and rather dry , but erect and haughty under her black hood .
the eyes of porthos were furtively cast upon this lady , and then roved about at large over the nave .
on her side the lady , who from time to time blushed , darted with the rapidity of lightning a glance toward the inconstant porthos ; and then immediately the eyes of porthos wandered anxiously .
it was plain that this mode of proceeding piqued the lady in the black hood , for she bit her lips till they bled , scratched the end of her nose , and could not sit still in her seat .
the lady with the black hood followed through all their wanderings the looks of porthos , and perceived that they rested upon the lady with the velvet cushion , the little negro , and the maid - servant .
during this time porthos played close . it was almost imperceptible motions of his eyes , fingers placed upon the lips , little assassinating smiles , which really did assassinate the disdained beauty .
then she cried , " ahem ! " under cover of the mea culpa , striking her breast so vigorously that everybody , even the lady with the red cushion , turned round toward her . porthos paid no attention . nevertheless , he understood it all , but was deaf .
the lady with the red cushion produced a great effect -- for she was very handsome -- upon the lady with the black hood , who saw in her a rival really to be dreaded ; a great effect upon porthos , who thought her much prettier than the lady with the black hood ; a great effect upon dartagnan , who recognized in her the lady of meung , of calais , and of dover , whom his persecutor , the man with the scar , had saluted by the name of milady .
he guessed , likewise , by induction , that porthos was taking his revenge for the defeat of chantilly , when the procurator s wife had proved so refractory with respect to her purse .
amid all this , dartagnan remarked also that not one countenance responded to the gallantries of porthos .
there were only chimeras and illusions ; but for real love , for true jealousy , is there any reality except illusions and chimeras ?
when she was only about three steps from him , he turned his head round , fixing his eyes steadfastly upon the lady with the red cushion , who had risen and was approaching , followed by her black boy and her woman .
when the lady of the red cushion came close to porthos , porthos drew his dripping hand from the font .
the fair worshipper touched the great hand of porthos with her delicate fingers , smiled , made the sign of the cross , and left the church .
" ma - madame ! " cried he ; " is that you ?
how is your husband , our dear monsieur coquenard ?
is he still as stingy as ever ?
where can my eyes have been not to have seen you during the two hours of the sermon ? "
" i was within two paces of you , monsieur , " replied the procurator s wife ; " but you did not perceive me because you had no eyes but for the pretty lady to whom you just now gave the holy water . "
porthos pretended to be confused .
" ah , " said he , " you have remarked-- "
" i must have been blind not to have seen . "
" monsieur porthos , " said the procurator s wife , " will you have the kindness to offer me your arm for five minutes ? i have something to say to you . "
" certainly , madame , " said porthos , winking to himself , as a gambler does who laughs at the dupe he is about to pluck .
at that moment dartagnan passed in pursuit of milady ; he cast a passing glance at porthos , and beheld this triumphant look .
" eh , eh ! " said he , reasoning to himself according to the strangely easy morality of that gallant period , " there is one who will be equipped in good time ! "
porthos , yielding to the pressure of the arm of the procurator s wife , as a bark yields to the rudder , arrived at the cloister st . magloire -- a little - frequented passage , enclosed with a turnstile at each end .
in the daytime nobody was seen there but mendicants devouring their crusts , and children at play .
" ah , monsieur porthos , " cried the procurator s wife , when she was assured that no one who was a stranger to the population of the locality could either see or hear her , " ah , monsieur porthos , you are a great conqueror , as it appears ! "
" i , madame ? " said porthos , drawing himself up proudly ; " how so ? "
" the signs just now , and the holy water !
but that must be a princess , at least -- that lady with her negro boy and her maid ! "
" my god ! madame , you are deceived , " said porthos ; " she is simply a duchess . "
" and that running footman who waited at the door , and that carriage with a coachman in grand livery who sat waiting on his seat ? "
porthos had seen neither the footman nor the carriage , but with the eye of a jealous woman , mme . coquenard had seen everything .
porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of the red cushion a princess .
" ah , you are quite the pet of the ladies , monsieur porthos ! " resumed the procurator s wife , with a sigh .
" well , " responded porthos , " you may imagine , with the physique with which nature has endowed me , i am not in want of good luck . "
" good lord , how quickly men forget ! " cried the procurator s wife , raising her eyes toward heaven .
" less quickly than the women , it seems to me , " replied porthos ; " for i , madame , i may say i was your victim , when wounded , dying , i was abandoned by the surgeons . i , the offspring of a noble family , who placed reliance upon your friendship -- i was near dying of my wounds at first , and of hunger afterward , in a beggarly inn at chantilly , without you ever deigning once to reply to the burning letters i addressed to you . "
" but , monsieur porthos , " murmured the procurator s wife , who began to feel that , to judge by the conduct of the great ladies of the time , she was wrong .
" i , who had sacrificed for you the baronne de-- "
" i know it well . "
" the comtesse de-- "
" monsieur porthos , be generous ! "
" you are right , madame , and i will not finish . "
" but it was my husband who would not hear of lending . "
" madame coquenard , " said porthos , " remember the first letter you wrote me , and which i preserve engraved in my memory . "
the procurator s wife uttered a groan .
" besides , " said she , " the sum you required me to borrow was rather large . "
" madame coquenard , i gave you the preference .
i had but to write to the duchesse -- but i wo nt repeat her name , for i am incapable of compromising a woman ; but this i know , that i had but to write to her and she would have sent me fifteen hundred . "
the procurator s wife shed a tear .
" monsieur porthos , " said she , " i can assure you that you have severely punished me ; and if in the time to come you should find yourself in a similar situation , you have but to apply to me . "
" fie , madame , fie ! " said porthos , as if disgusted . " let us not talk about money , if you please ; it is humiliating . "
" then you no longer love me ! " said the procurator s wife , slowly and sadly .
porthos maintained a majestic silence .
" and that is the only reply you make ?
alas , i understand . "
" think of the offense you have committed toward me , madame ! it remains here ! " said porthos , placing his hand on his heart , and pressing it strongly .
" i will repair it , indeed i will , my dear porthos . "
" besides , what did i ask of you ? " resumed porthos , with a movement of the shoulders full of good fellowship . " a loan , nothing more !
after all , i am not an unreasonable man .
i know you are not rich , madame coquenard , and that your husband is obliged to bleed his poor clients to squeeze a few paltry crowns from them . oh !
if you were a duchess , a marchioness , or a countess , it would be quite a different thing ; it would be unpardonable . "
the procurator s wife was piqued .
" please to know , monsieur porthos , " said she , " that my strongbox , the strongbox of a procurator s wife though it may be , is better filled than those of your affected minxes . "
" the doubles the offense , " said porthos , disengaging his arm from that of the procurator s wife ; " for if you are rich , madame coquenard , then there is no excuse for your refusal . "
" when i said rich , " replied the procurator s wife , who saw that she had gone too far , " you must not take the word literally .
i am not precisely rich , though i am pretty well off . "
" hold , madame , " said porthos , " let us say no more upon the subject , i beg of you .
you have misunderstood me , all sympathy is extinct between us . "
" ingrate that you are ! "
" ah ! i advise you to complain ! " said porthos .
" begone , then , to your beautiful duchess ; i will detain you no longer . "
" and she is not to be despised , in my opinion . "
" now , monsieur porthos , once more , and this is the last ! do you love me still ? "
" ah , madame , " said porthos , in the most melancholy tone he could assume , " when we are about to enter upon a campaign -- a campaign , in which my presentiments tell me i shall be killed-- "
" oh , do nt talk of such things ! " cried the procurator s wife , bursting into tears .
" something whispers me so , " continued porthos , becoming more and more melancholy .
" rather say that you have a new love . "
" not so ; i speak frankly to you .
no object affects me ; and i even feel here , at the bottom of my heart , something which speaks for you .
but in fifteen days , as you know , or as you do not know , this fatal campaign is to open . i shall be fearfully preoccupied with my outfit .
then i must make a journey to see my family , in the lower part of brittany , to obtain the sum necessary for my departure . "
porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice .
" and as , " continued he , " the duchess whom you saw at the church has estates near to those of my family , we mean to make the journey together .
journeys , you know , appear much shorter when we travel two in company . "
" have you no friends in paris , then , monsieur porthos ? " said the procurator s wife .
" i thought i had , " said porthos , resuming his melancholy air ; " but i have been taught my mistake . "
" come to our house tomorrow . you are the son of my aunt , consequently my cousin ; you come from noyon , in picardy ; you have several lawsuits and no attorney .
can you recollect all that ? "
" perfectly , madame . "
" come at dinnertime . "
" very well . "
" and be upon your guard before my husband , who is rather shrewd , notwithstanding his seventy - six years . " " seventy - six years !
peste ! that s a fine age ! " replied porthos .
" a great age , you mean , monsieur porthos .
yes , the poor man may be expected to leave me a widow , any hour , " continued she , throwing a significant glance at porthos .
" fortunately , by our marriage contract , the survivor takes everything . "
" all ? "
" yes , all . "
" you are a woman of precaution , i see , my dear madame coquenard , " said porthos , squeezing the hand of the procurator s wife tenderly .
" we are then reconciled , dear monsieur porthos ? " said she , simpering .
" for life , " replied porthos , in the same manner .
" till we meet again , then , dear traitor ! "
" till we meet again , my forgetful charmer ! "
" tomorrow , my angel ! "
" tomorrow , flame of my life ! "
30 dartagnan and the englishman
dartagnan followed milady without being perceived by her . he saw her get into her carriage , and heard her order the coachman to drive to st . germain .
it was useless to try to keep pace on foot with a carriage drawn by two powerful horses .
dartagnan therefore returned to the rue ferou .
in the rue de seine he met planchet , who had stopped before the house of a pastry cook , and was contemplating with ecstasy a cake of the most appetizing appearance .
planchet proceeded toward the rue du colombier , and dartagnan toward the rue ferou .
athos was at home , emptying sadly a bottle of the famous spanish wine he had brought back with him from his journey into picardy .
he made a sign for grimaud to bring a glass for dartagnan , and grimaud obeyed as usual .
dartagnan related to athos all that had passed at the church between porthos and the procurator s wife , and how their comrade was probably by that time in a fair way to be equipped .
" as for me , " replied athos to this recital , " i am quite at my ease ; it will not be women that will defray the expense of my outfit . "
" handsome , well - bred , noble lord as you are , my dear athos , neither princesses nor queens would be secure from your amorous solicitations . "
" how young this dartagnan is ! " said athos , shrugging his shoulders ; and he made a sign to grimaud to bring another bottle .
at that moment planchet put his head modestly in at the half - open door , and told his master that the horses were ready .
" what horses ? " asked athos .
" two horses that monsieur de treville lends me at my pleasure , and with which i am now going to take a ride to st . germain . "
" well , and what are you going to do at st . germain ? " then demanded athos .
then dartagnan described the meeting which he had at the church , and how he had found that lady who , with the seigneur in the black cloak and with the scar near his temple , filled his mind constantly .
" that is to say , you are in love with this lady as you were with madame bonacieux , " said athos , shrugging his shoulders contemptuously , as if he pitied human weakness .
" i ? not at all ! " said dartagnan .
" i am only curious to unravel the mystery to which she is attached .
i do not know why , but i imagine that this woman , wholly unknown to me as she is , and wholly unknown to her as i am , has an influence over my life . "
" well , perhaps you are right , " said athos . " i do not know a woman that is worth the trouble of being sought for when she is once lost .
madame bonacieux is lost ; so much the worse for her if she is found . "
" no , athos , no , you are mistaken , " said dartagnan ; " i love my poor constance more than ever , and if i knew the place in which she is , were it at the end of the world , i would go to free her from the hands of her enemies ; but i am ignorant . all my researches have been useless .
what is to be said ? i must divert my attention ! "
" amuse yourself with milady , my dear dartagnan ; i wish you may with all my heart , if that will amuse you . "
" hear me , athos , " said dartagnan . " instead of shutting yourself up here as if you were under arrest , get on horseback and come and take a ride with me to st . germain . "
" my dear fellow , " said athos , " i ride horses when i have any ; when i have none , i go afoot . "
" well , " said dartagnan , smiling at the misanthropy of athos , which from any other person would have offended him , " i ride what i can get ; i am not so proud as you .
so au revoir , dear athos . "
" au revoir , " said the musketeer , making a sign to grimaud to uncork the bottle he had just brought .
dartagnan and planchet mounted , and took the road to st . germain .
all along the road , what athos had said respecting mme . bonacieux recurred to the mind of the young man .
meantime , he was going to try to find out milady .
milady had spoken to the man in the black cloak ; therefore she knew him .
now , in the opinion of dartagnan , it was certainly the man in the black cloak who had carried off mme . bonacieux the second time , as he had carried her off the first . dartagnan then only half - lied , which is lying but little , when he said that by going in search of milady he at the same time went in search of constance .
thinking of all this , and from time to time giving a touch of the spur to his horse , dartagnan completed his short journey , and arrived at st . germain .
he had just passed by the pavilion in which ten years later louis xiv was born .
this person walked along the terrace , which was ornamented with flowers .
planchet recognized him first .
" eh , monsieur ! " said he , addressing dartagnan , " do nt you remember that face which is blinking yonder ? "
" no , " said dartagnan , " and yet i am certain it is not the first time i have seen that visage . "
" parbleu , i believe it is not , " said planchet . " why , it is poor lubin , the lackey of the comte de wardes -- he whom you took such good care of a month ago at calais , on the road to the governor s country house ! "
" so it is ! " said dartagnan ; " i know him now .
do you think he would recollect you ? "
" my faith , monsieur , he was in such trouble that i doubt if he can have retained a very clear recollection of me . "
" well , go and talk with the boy , " said dartagnan , " and make out if you can from his conversation whether his master is dead . "
planchet dismounted and went straight up to lubin , who did not at all remember him , and the two lackeys began to chat with the best understanding possible ; while dartagnan turned the two horses into a lane , went round the house , and came back to watch the conference from behind a hedge of filberts .
at the end of an instant s observation he heard the noise of a vehicle , and saw milady s carriage stop opposite to him .
he could not be mistaken ; milady was in it .
dartagnan leaned upon the neck of his horse , in order that he might see without being seen .
milady put her charming blond head out at the window , and gave her orders to her maid .
the latter -- a pretty girl of about twenty or twenty - two years , active and lively , the true soubrette of a great lady -- jumped from the step upon which , according to the custom of the time , she was seated , and took her way toward the terrace upon which dartagnan had perceived lubin .
dartagnan followed the soubrette with his eyes , and saw her go toward the terrace ; but it happened that someone in the house called lubin , so that planchet remained alone , looking in all directions for the road where dartagnan had disappeared .
the maid approached planchet , whom she took for lubin , and holding out a little billet to him said , " for your master . "
" for my master ? " replied planchet , astonished .
" yes , and important .
take it quickly . "
thereupon she ran toward the carriage , which had turned round toward the way it came , jumped upon the step , and the carriage drove off .
planchet turned and returned the billet . then , accustomed to passive obedience , he jumped down from the terrace , ran toward the lane , and at the end of twenty paces met dartagnan , who , having seen all , was coming to him .
" for you , monsieur , " said planchet , presenting the billet to the young man .
" for me ? " said dartagnan ; " are you sure of that ? "
" pardieu , monsieur , i ca nt be more sure .
the soubrette said ,  for your master . 
dartagnan opened the letter , and read these words :
" a person who takes more interest in you than she is willing to confess wishes to know on what day it will suit you to walk in the forest ?
tomorrow , at the hotel field of the cloth of gold , a lackey in black and red will wait for your reply . "
" oh ! " said dartagnan , " this is rather warm ; it appears that milady and i are anxious about the health of the same person .
well , planchet , how is the good monsieur de wardes ? he is not dead , then ? "
" no , monsieur , he is as well as a man can be with four sword wounds in his body ; for you , without question , inflicted four upon the dear gentleman , and he is still very weak , having lost almost all his blood .
as i said , monsieur , lubin did not know me , and told me our adventure from one end to the other . "
" well done , planchet ! you are the king of lackeys . now jump onto your horse , and let us overtake the carriage . "
this did not take long . at the end of five minutes they perceived the carriage drawn up by the roadside ; a cavalier , richly dressed , was close to the door .
the conversation between milady and the cavalier was so animated that dartagnan stopped on the other side of the carriage without anyone but the pretty soubrette perceiving his presence .
the cavalier laughed aloud , which appeared to exasperate milady still more .
it appears to me that this cavalier has made you very angry .
speak one word , madame , and i take upon myself to punish him for his want of courtesy . "
at the first word milady turned , looking at the young man with astonishment ; and when he had finished , she said in very good french , " monsieur , i should with great confidence place myself under your protection if the person with whom i quarrel were not my brother . "
" ah , excuse me , then , " said dartagnan . " you must be aware that i was ignorant of that , madame . "
" what is that stupid fellow troubling himself about ? " cried the cavalier whom milady had designated as her brother , stooping down to the height of the coach window . " why does not he go about his business ? "
" stupid fellow yourself ! " said dartagnan , stooping in his turn on the neck of his horse , and answering on his side through the carriage window . " i do not go on because it pleases me to stop here . "
the cavalier addressed some words in english to his sister .
" i speak to you in french , " said dartagnan ; " be kind enough , then , to reply to me in the same language .
you are madame s brother , i learn -- be it so ; but fortunately you are not mine . "
it might be thought that milady , timid as women are in general , would have interposed in this commencement of mutual provocations in order to prevent the quarrel from going too far ; but on the contrary , she threw herself back in her carriage , and called out coolly to the coachman , " go on -- home ! "
the pretty soubrette cast an anxious glance at dartagnan , whose good looks seemed to have made an impression on her .
the carriage went on , and left the two men facing each other ; no material obstacle separated them .
the cavalier made a movement as if to follow the carriage ; but dartagnan , whose anger , already excited , was much increased by recognizing in him the englishman of amiens who had won his horse and had been very near winning his diamond of athos , caught at his bridle and stopped him .
" well , monsieur , " said he , " you appear to be more stupid than i am , for you forget there is a little quarrel to arrange between us two . "
" ah , " said the englishman , " is it you , my master ?
it seems you must always be playing some game or other . "
" yes ; and that reminds me that i have a revenge to take .
" do you wish to play the braggart with an unarmed man ? "
" needless , " said the englishman ; " i am well furnished with such playthings . "
" very well , my worthy gentleman , " replied dartagnan , " pick out the longest , and come and show it to me this evening . "
" where , if you please ? "
" behind the luxembourg ; that s a charming spot for such amusements as the one i propose to you . "
" that will do ; i will be there . "
" your hour ? "
" six oclock . "
" a propos , you have probably one or two friends ? "
" i have three , who would be honored by joining in the sport with me . " " three ?
marvelous ! that falls out oddly ! three is just my number ! "
" now , then , who are you ? " asked the englishman .
" i am monsieur dartagnan , a gascon gentleman , serving in the king s musketeers .
and you ? "
" i am lord de winter , baron sheffield . "
" well , then , i am your servant , monsieur baron , " said dartagnan , " though you have names rather difficult to recollect . "
and touching his horse with the spur , he cantered back to paris .
as he was accustomed to do in all cases of any consequence , dartagnan went straight to the residence of athos .
he found athos reclining upon a large sofa , where he was waiting , as he said , for his outfit to come and find him .
he related to athos all that had passed , except the letter to m. de wardes .
athos was delighted to find he was going to fight an englishman .
we might say that was his dream .
they immediately sent their lackeys for porthos and aramis , and on their arrival made them acquainted with the situation .
porthos drew his sword from the scabbard , and made passes at the wall , springing back from time to time , and making contortions like a dancer .
aramis , who was constantly at work at his poem , shut himself up in athos s closet , and begged not to be disturbed before the moment of drawing swords .
athos , by signs , desired grimaud to bring another bottle of wine .
dartagnan employed himself in arranging a little plan , of which we shall hereafter see the execution , and which promised him some agreeable adventure , as might be seen by the smiles which from time to time passed over his countenance , whose thoughtfulness they animated .
31 english and french
the hour having come , they went with their four lackeys to a spot behind the luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats .
athos threw a piece of money to the goatkeeper to withdraw .
the lackeys were ordered to act as sentinels .
a silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure , entered , and joined the musketeers . then , according to foreign custom , the presentations took place .
the englishmen were all men of rank ; consequently the odd names of their adversaries were for them not only a matter of surprise , but of annoyance .
" but after all , " said lord de winter , when the three friends had been named , " we do not know who you are . we can not fight with such names ; they are names of shepherds . "
" therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed names , " said athos .
" which only gives us a greater desire to know the real ones , " replied the englishman .
" you played very willingly with us without knowing our names , " said athos , " by the same token that you won our horses . "
one plays with anybody ; but one fights only with equals . "
porthos and aramis did the same .
" does that satisfy you ? " said athos to his adversary . " do you find me of sufficient rank to do me the honor of crossing swords with me ? "
" yes , monsieur , " said the englishman , bowing .
" well ! now shall i tell you something ? " added athos , coolly .
" what ? " replied the englishman .
" why so ? "
" because i am believed to be dead , and have reasons for wishing nobody to know i am living ; so that i shall be obliged to kill you to prevent my secret from roaming over the fields . "
the englishman looked at athos , believing that he jested , but athos did not jest the least in the world .
" gentlemen , " said athos , addressing at the same time his companions and their adversaries , " are we ready ? "
" yes ! " answered the englishmen and the frenchmen , as with one voice .
" on guard , then ! " cried athos .
immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of the setting sun , and the combat began with an animosity very natural between men twice enemies .
athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he had been practicing in a fencing school .
porthos , abated , no doubt , of his too - great confidence by his adventure of chantilly , played with skill and prudence .
aramis , who had the third canto of his poem to finish , behaved like a man in haste .
he hit him but once , but as he had foretold , that hit was a mortal one ; the sword pierced his heart .
aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fifty paces , the man ended by fairly taking to his heels , and disappeared amid the hooting of the lackeys .
as to dartagnan , he fought purely and simply on the defensive ; and when he saw his adversary pretty well fatigued , with a vigorous side thrust sent his sword flying .
the baron , finding himself disarmed , took two or three steps back , but in this movement his foot slipped and he fell backward .
dartagnan was over him at a bound , and said to the englishman , pointing his sword to his throat , " i could kill you , my lord , you are completely in my hands ; but i spare your life for the sake of your sister . "
dartagnan was at the height of joy ; he had realized the plan he had imagined beforehand , whose picturing had produced the smiles we noted upon his face .
as porthos and aramis were undressing him , in the hope of finding his wound not mortal , a large purse dropped from his clothes .
dartagnan picked it up and offered it to lord de winter .
" what the devil would you have me do with that ? " said the englishman .
" you can restore it to his family , " said dartagnan .
" his family will care much about such a trifle as that ! his family will inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him . keep the purse for your lackeys . "
dartagnan put the purse into his pocket .
dartagnan blushed with pleasure , and bowed a sign of assent .
at this time athos came up to dartagnan .
" what do you mean to do with that purse ? " whispered he .
" why , i meant to pass it over to you , my dear athos . "
" me ! why to me ? "
" why , you killed him ! they are the spoils of victory . "
" i , the heir of an enemy ! " said athos ; " for whom , then , do you take me ? "
" it is the custom in war , " said dartagnan , " why should it not be the custom in a duel ? "
" even on the field of battle , i have never done that . "
porthos shrugged his shoulders ; aramis by a movement of his lips endorsed athos .
" then , " said dartagnan , " let us give the money to the lackeys , as lord de winter desired us to do . "
" yes , " said athos ; " let us give the money to the lackeys -- not to our lackeys , but to the lackeys of the englishmen . "
athos took the purse , and threw it into the hand of the coachman .
" for you and your comrades . "
this greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even porthos ; and this french generosity , repeated by lord de winter and his friend , was highly applauded , except by mm grimaud , bazin , mousqueton and planchet .
this introduction to milady clarik occupied the head of our gascon greatly .
he remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto been mixed up in his destiny .
according to his conviction , she was some creature of the cardinal , and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn toward her by one of those sentiments for which we can not account .
his only fear was that milady would recognize in him the man of meung and of dover .
then she knew that he was one of the friends of m. de treville , and consequently , that he belonged body and soul to the king ; which would make him lose a part of his advantage , since when known to milady as he knew her , he played only an equal game with her .
as to the commencement of an intrigue between her and m. de wardes , our presumptuous hero gave but little heed to that , although the marquis was young , handsome , rich , and high in the cardinal s favor .
it is not for nothing we are but twenty years old , above all if we were born at tarbes .
dartagnan began by making his most splendid toilet , then returned to athos s , and according to custom , related everything to him .
athos listened to his projects , then shook his head , and recommended prudence to him with a shade of bitterness .
" what ! " said he , " you have just lost one woman , whom you call good , charming , perfect ; and here you are , running headlong after another . "
dartagnan felt the truth of this reproach .
" i loved madame bonacieux with my heart , while i only love milady with my head , " said he . " in getting introduced to her , my principal object is to ascertain what part she plays at court . "
" the part she plays , pardieu ! it is not difficult to divine that , after all you have told me .
she is some emissary of the cardinal ; a woman who will draw you into a snare in which you will leave your head . "
" the devil ! my dear athos , you view things on the dark side , methinks . "
" my dear fellow , i mistrust women . can it be otherwise ? i bought my experience dearly -- particularly fair women .
milady is fair , you say ? "
" she has the most beautiful light hair imaginable ! "
" ah , my poor dartagnan ! " said athos .
" be enlightened ! " said athos , phlegmatically .
lord de winter arrived at the appointed time ; but athos , being warned of his coming , went into the other chamber .
he therefore found dartagnan alone , and as it was nearly eight oclock he took the young man with him .
an elegant carriage waited below , and as it was drawn by two excellent horses , they were soon at the place royale .
milady clarik received dartagnan ceremoniously .
her hotel was remarkably sumptuous , and while the most part of the english had quit , or were about to quit , france on account of the war , milady had just been laying out much money upon her residence ; which proved that the general measure which drove the english from france did not affect her .
" you see , " said lord de winter , presenting dartagnan to his sister , " a young gentleman who has held my life in his hands , and who has not abused his advantage , although we have been twice enemies , although it was i who insulted him , and although i am an englishman .
thank him , then , madame , if you have any affection for me . "
milady frowned slightly ; a scarcely visible cloud passed over her brow , and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her lips that the young man , who saw and observed this triple shade , almost shuddered at it .
the brother did not perceive this ; he had turned round to play with milady s favorite monkey , which had pulled him by the doublet .
" you are welcome , monsieur , " said milady , in a voice whose singular sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill - humor which dartagnan had just remarked ; " you have today acquired eternal rights to my gratitude . "
the englishman then turned round and described the combat without omitting a single detail .
milady listened with the greatest attention , and yet it was easily to be perceived , whatever effort she made to conceal her impressions , that this recital was not agreeable to her .
the blood rose to her head , and her little foot worked with impatience beneath her robe .
lord de winter perceived nothing of this .
when he had finished , he went to a table upon which was a salver with spanish wine and glasses .
he filled two glasses , and by a sign invited dartagnan to drink .
dartagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an englishman to refuse to pledge him .
he therefore drew near to the table and took the second glass .
he did not , however , lose sight of milady , and in a mirror he perceived the change that came over her face .
now that she believed herself to be no longer observed , a sentiment resembling ferocity animated her countenance .
she bit her handkerchief with her beautiful teeth .
that pretty little soubrette whom dartagnan had already observed then came in . she spoke some words to lord de winter in english , who thereupon requested dartagnan s permission to retire , excusing himself on account of the urgency of the business that had called him away , and charging his sister to obtain his pardon .
dartagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with lord de winter , and then returned to milady .
her countenance , with surprising mobility , had recovered its gracious expression ; but some little red spots on her handkerchief indicated that she had bitten her lips till the blood came .
those lips were magnificent ; they might be said to be of coral .
the conversation took a cheerful turn .
milady appeared to have entirely recovered .
she told dartagnan that lord de winter was her brother - in - law , and not her brother . she had married a younger brother of the family , who had left her a widow with one child .
this child was the only heir to lord de winter , if lord de winter did not marry .
all this showed dartagnan that there was a veil which concealed something ; but he could not yet see under this veil .
in addition to this , after a half hour s conversation dartagnan was convinced that milady was his compatriot ; she spoke french with an elegance and a purity that left no doubt on that head .
dartagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations of devotion .
to all the simple things which escaped our gascon , milady replied with a smile of kindness .
the hour came for him to retire .
dartagnan took leave of milady , and left the saloon the happiest of men .
on the staircase he met the pretty soubrette , who brushed gently against him as she passed , and then , blushing to the eyes , asked his pardon for having touched him in a voice so sweet that the pardon was granted instantly .
dartagnan came again on the morrow , and was still better received than on the evening before .
lord de winter was not at home ; and it was milady who this time did all the honors of the evening .
she appeared to take a great interest in him , asked him whence he came , who were his friends , and whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself to the cardinal .
dartagnan , who , as we have said , was exceedingly prudent for a young man of twenty , then remembered his suspicions regarding milady . he launched into a eulogy of his eminence , and said that he should not have failed to enter into the guards of the cardinal instead of the king s guards if he had happened to know m. de cavois instead of m. de treville .
milady changed the conversation without any appearance of affectation , and asked dartagnan in the most careless manner possible if he had ever been in england .
dartagnan replied that he had been sent thither by m. de treville to treat for a supply of horses , and that he had brought back four as specimens .
milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit her lips ; she had to deal with a gascon who played close .
at the same hour as on the preceding evening , dartagnan retired .
dartagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that , and each day milady gave him a more gracious reception .
every evening , either in the antechamber , the corridor , or on the stairs , he met the pretty soubrette .
but , as we have said , dartagnan paid no attention to this persistence of poor kitty .
32 a procurator s dinner
however brilliant had been the part played by porthos in the duel , it had not made him forget the dinner of the procurator s wife .
on the morrow he received the last touches of mousqueton s brush for an hour , and took his way toward the rue aux ours with the steps of a man who was doubly in favor with fortune .
his heart beat , but not like dartagnan s with a young and impatient love .
no ; a more material interest stirred his blood . he was about at last to pass that mysterious threshold , to climb those unknown stairs by which , one by one , the old crowns of m. coquenard had ascended .
he was about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had twenty times beheld the image in his dreams -- a coffer long and deep , locked , bolted , fastened in the wall ; a coffer of which he had so often heard , and which the hands -- a little wrinkled , it is true , but still not without elegance -- of the procurator s wife were about to open to his admiring looks .
and then he -- a wanderer on the earth , a man without fortune , a man without family , a soldier accustomed to inns , cabarets , taverns , and restaurants , a lover of wine forced to depend upon chance treats -- was about to partake of family meals , to enjoy the pleasures of a comfortable establishment , and to give himself up to those little attentions which " the harder one is , the more they please , " as old soldiers say .
to come in the capacity of a cousin , and seat himself every day at a good table ; to smooth the yellow , wrinkled brow of the old procurator ; to pluck the clerks a little by teaching them bassette , passe - dix , and lansquenet , in their utmost nicety , and winning from them , by way of fee for the lesson he would give them in an hour , their savings of a month -- all this was enormously delightful to porthos .
the musketeer could not forget the evil reports which then prevailed , and which indeed have survived them , of the procurators of the period -- meanness , stinginess , fasts ; but as , after all , excepting some few acts of economy which porthos had always found very unseasonable , the procurator s wife had been tolerably liberal -- that is , be it understood , for a procurator s wife -- he hoped to see a household of a highly comfortable kind .
and yet , at the very door the musketeer began to entertain some doubts . the approach was not such as to prepossess people -- an ill - smelling , dark passage , a staircase half - lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer from a neighboring yard ; on the first floor a low door studded with enormous nails , like the principal gate of the grand chatelet .
porthos knocked with his hand . a tall , pale clerk , his face shaded by a forest of virgin hair , opened the door , and bowed with the air of a man forced at once to respect in another lofty stature , which indicated strength , the military dress , which indicated rank , and a ruddy countenance , which indicated familiarity with good living .
a shorter clerk came behind the first , a taller clerk behind the second , a stripling of a dozen years rising behind the third .
in all , three clerks and a half , which , for the time , argued a very extensive clientage .
although the musketeer was not expected before one oclock , the procurator s wife had been on the watch ever since midday , reckoning that the heart , or perhaps the stomach , of her lover would bring him before his time .
mme . coquenard therefore entered the office from the house at the same moment her guest entered from the stairs , and the appearance of the worthy lady relieved him from an awkward embarrassment .
the clerks surveyed him with great curiosity , and he , not knowing well what to say to this ascending and descending scale , remained tongue - tied .
" it is my cousin ! " cried the procurator s wife . " come in , come in , monsieur porthos ! "
the name of porthos produced its effect upon the clerks , who began to laugh ; but porthos turned sharply round , and every countenance quickly recovered its gravity .
they reached the office of the procurator after having passed through the antechamber in which the clerks were , and the study in which they ought to have been . this last apartment was a sort of dark room , littered with papers .
on quitting the study they left the kitchen on the right , and entered the reception room .
all these rooms , which communicated with one another , did not inspire porthos favorably .
words might be heard at a distance through all these open doors . then , while passing , he had cast a rapid , investigating glance into the kitchen ; and he was obliged to confess to himself , to the shame of the procurator s wife and his own regret , that he did not see that fire , that animation , that bustle , which when a good repast is on foot prevails generally in that sanctuary of good living .
the procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit , as he expressed no surprise at the sight of porthos , who advanced toward him with a sufficiently easy air , and saluted him courteously .
" we are cousins , it appears , monsieur porthos ? " said the procurator , rising , yet supporting his weight upon the arms of his cane chair .
the old man , wrapped in a large black doublet , in which the whole of his slender body was concealed , was brisk and dry . his little gray eyes shone like carbuncles , and appeared , with his grinning mouth , to be the only part of his face in which life survived .
unfortunately the legs began to refuse their service to this bony machine . during the last five or six months that this weakness had been felt , the worthy procurator had nearly become the slave of his wife .
the cousin was received with resignation , that was all .
m. coquenard , firm upon his legs , would have declined all relationship with m. porthos .
" yes , monsieur , we are cousins , " said porthos , without being disconcerted , as he had never reckoned upon being received enthusiastically by the husband .
" by the female side , i believe ? " said the procurator , maliciously .
porthos did not feel the ridicule of this , and took it for a piece of simplicity , at which he laughed in his large mustache .
mme . coquenard , who knew that a simple - minded procurator was a very rare variety in the species , smiled a little , and colored a great deal .
m coquenard had , since the arrival of porthos , frequently cast his eyes with great uneasiness upon a large chest placed in front of his oak desk .
porthos comprehended that this chest , although it did not correspond in shape with that which he had seen in his dreams , must be the blessed coffer , and he congratulated himself that the reality was several feet higher than the dream .
m coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigations any further ; but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest and fixing it upon porthos , he contented himself with saying , " monsieur our cousin will do us the favor of dining with us once before his departure for the campaign , will he not , madame coquenard ? "
" oh , my legs , my poor legs ! where are you ? " murmured coquenard , and he tried to smile .
this succor , which came to porthos at the moment in which he was attacked in his gastronomic hopes , inspired much gratitude in the musketeer toward the procurator s wife .
the hour of dinner soon arrived .
they passed into the eating room -- a large dark room situated opposite the kitchen .
the clerks , who , as it appeared , had smelled unusual perfumes in the house , were of military punctuality , and held their stools in hand quite ready to sit down .
their jaws moved preliminarily with fearful threatenings .
" indeed ! " thought porthos , casting a glance at the three hungry clerks -- for the errand boy , as might be expected , was not admitted to the honors of the magisterial table , " in my cousin s place , i would not keep such gourmands !
they look like shipwrecked sailors who have not eaten for six weeks . "
m coquenard entered , pushed along upon his armchair with casters by mme . coquenard , whom porthos assisted in rolling her husband up to the table .
he had scarcely entered when he began to agitate his nose and his jaws after the example of his clerks .
" oh , oh ! " said he ; " here is a soup which is rather inviting . "
mme . coquenard smiled , and upon a sign from her everyone eagerly took his seat .
m coquenard was served first , then porthos . afterward mme . coquenard filled her own plate , and distributed the crusts without soup to the impatient clerks .
at this moment the door of the dining room unclosed with a creak , and porthos perceived through the half - open flap the little clerk who , not being allowed to take part in the feast , ate his dry bread in the passage with the double odor of the dining room and kitchen .
after the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl -- a piece of magnificence which caused the eyes of the diners to dilate in such a manner that they seemed ready to burst .
" one may see that you love your family , madame coquenard , " said the procurator , with a smile that was almost tragic . " you are certainly treating your cousin very handsomely ! "
the poor fowl was thin , and covered with one of those thick , bristly skins through which the teeth can not penetrate with all their efforts . the fowl must have been sought for a long time on the perch , to which it had retired to die of old age .
" the devil ! " thought porthos , " this is poor work . i respect old age , but i do nt much like it boiled or roasted . "
and he looked round to see if anybody partook of his opinion ; but on the contrary , he saw nothing but eager eyes which were devouring , in anticipation , that sublime fowl which was the object of his contempt .
mme . coquenard drew the dish toward her , skillfully detached the two great black feet , which she placed upon her husband s plate , cut off the neck , which with the head she put on one side for herself , raised the wing for porthos , and then returned the bird otherwise intact to the servant who had brought it in , who disappeared with it before the musketeer had time to examine the variations which disappointment produces upon faces , according to the characters and temperaments of those who experience it .
in the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made its appearance -- an enormous dish in which some bones of mutton that at first sight one might have believed to have some meat on them pretended to show themselves .
but the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit , and their lugubrious looks settled down into resigned countenances .
mme . coquenard distributed this dish to the young men with the moderation of a good housewife .
the time for wine came .
porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly , and shuddered when he felt the knee of the procurator s wife under the table , as it came in search of his .
he also drank half a glass of this sparingly served wine , and found it to be nothing but that horrible montreuil -- the terror of all expert palates .
m coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted , and sighed deeply .
" will you eat any of these beans , cousin porthos ? " said mme . coquenard , in that tone which says , " take my advice , do nt touch them . "
the procurator repeated several times , " ah , madame coquenard !
accept my compliments ; your dinner has been a real feast .
porthos fancied they were mystifying him , and began to curl his mustache and knit his eyebrows ; but the knee of mme . coquenard gently advised him to be patient .
" go , young men ! go and promote digestion by working , " said the procurator , gravely .
the clerks gone , mme . coquenard rose and took from a buffet a piece of cheese , some preserved quinces , and a cake which she had herself made of almonds and honey .
m coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too many good things . porthos bit his lips because he saw not the wherewithal to dine .
he looked to see if the dish of beans was still there ; the dish of beans had disappeared .
" a positive feast ! " cried m. coquenard , turning about in his chair , " a real feast , epulce epulorum . lucullus dines with lucullus . "
porthos looked at the bottle , which was near him , and hoped that with wine , bread , and cheese , he might make a dinner ; but wine was wanting , the bottle was empty . m. and mme . coquenard did not seem to observe it .
" this is fine ! " said porthos to himself ; " i am prettily caught ! "
he passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves , and stuck his teeth into the sticky pastry of mme . coquenard .
" now , " said he , " the sacrifice is consummated !
ah ! if i had not the hope of peeping with madame coquenard into her husband s chest ! "
m coquenard , after the luxuries of such a repast , which he called an excess , felt the want of a siesta .
the procurator s wife took porthos into an adjoining room , and they began to lay the basis of a reconciliation .
" you can come and dine three times a week , " said mme . coquenard .
" thanks , madame ! " said porthos , " but i do nt like to abuse your kindness ; besides , i must think of my outfit ! "
" that s true , " said the procurator s wife , groaning , " that unfortunate outfit ! "
" alas , yes , " said porthos , " it is so . "
" but of what , then , does the equipment of your company consist , monsieur porthos ? "
" oh , of many things ! " said porthos . " the musketeers are , as you know , picked soldiers , and they require many things useless to the guardsmen or the swiss . "
" but yet , detail them to me . "
" why , they may amount to-- " , said porthos , who preferred discussing the total to taking them one by one .
the procurator s wife waited tremblingly .
" to how much ? " said she . " i hope it does not exceed-- " she stopped ; speech failed her .
" good god ! " cried she , " two thousand livres ! why , that is a fortune ! "
porthos made a most significant grimace ; mme . coquenard understood it .
" i wished to know the detail , " said she , " because , having many relatives in business , i was almost sure of obtaining things at a hundred per cent less than you would pay yourself . "
" ah , ah ! " said porthos , " that is what you meant to say ! "
" yes , dear monsieur porthos . thus , for instance , do nt you in the first place want a horse ? "
" yes , a horse . "
" well , then ! i can just suit you . "
" ah ! " said porthos , brightening , " that s well as regards my horse ; but i must have the appointments complete , as they include objects which a musketeer alone can purchase , and which will not amount , besides , to more than three hundred livres . " " three hundred livres ?
then put down three hundred livres , " said the procurator s wife , with a sigh . porthos smiled .
it may be remembered that he had the saddle which came from buckingham . these three hundred livres he reckoned upon putting snugly into his pocket .
" then , " continued he , " there is a horse for my lackey , and my valise . as to my arms , it is useless to trouble you about them ; i have them . "
" ah , madame ! " said porthos , haughtily ; " do you take me for a beggar ? "
" well , agreed for a pretty mule , " said porthos ; " you are right , i have seen very great spanish nobles whose whole suite were mounted on mules .
" be satisfied , " said the procurator s wife .
" there remains the valise , " added porthos .
" oh , do nt let that disturb you , " cried mme . coquenard . " my husband has five or six valises ; you shall choose the best . there is one in particular which he prefers in his journeys , large enough to hold all the world . "
" your valise is then empty ? " asked porthos , with simplicity .
" certainly it is empty , " replied the procurator s wife , in real innocence .
" ah , but the valise i want , " cried porthos , " is a well - filled one , my dear . "
madame uttered fresh sighs .
finally , the rest of the equipment was successively debated in the same manner ; and the result of the sitting was that the procurator s wife should give eight hundred livres in money , and should furnish the horse and the mule which should have the honor of carrying porthos and mousqueton to glory .
33 soubrette and mistress
" good ! " thought dartagnan , " she is charged with some message for me from her mistress ; she is about to appoint some rendezvous of which she had not courage to speak . "
and he looked down at the pretty girl with the most triumphant air imaginable .
" i wish to say three words to you , monsieur chevalier , " stammered the soubrette .
" speak , my child , speak , " said dartagnan ; " i listen . "
" here ? impossible ! that which i have to say is too long , and above all , too secret . "
" well , what is to be done ? "
" if monsieur chevalier would follow me ? " said kitty , timidly .
" where you please , my dear child . "
" come , then . "
and kitty , who had not let go the hand of dartagnan , led him up a little dark , winding staircase , and after ascending about fifteen steps , opened a door .
" come in here , monsieur chevalier , " said she ; " here we shall be alone , and can talk . "
" and whose room is this , my dear child ? "
" it is mine , monsieur chevalier ; it communicates with my mistress s by that door .
but you need not fear . she will not hear what we say ; she never goes to bed before midnight . "
dartagnan cast a glance around him .
the little apartment was charming for its taste and neatness ; but in spite of himself , his eyes were directed to that door which kitty said led to milady s chamber .
kitty guessed what was passing in the mind of the young man , and heaved a deep sigh .
" you love my mistress , then , very dearly , monsieur chevalier ? " said she .
" oh , more than i can say , kitty ! i am mad for her ! "
kitty breathed a second sigh .
" alas , monsieur , " said she , " that is too bad . "
" what the devil do you see so bad in it ? " said dartagnan .
" because , monsieur , " replied kitty , " my mistress loves you not at all . "
" hein ! " said dartagnan , " can she have charged you to tell me so ? "
" oh , no , monsieur ; but out of the regard i have for you , i have taken the resolution to tell you so . "
" much obliged , my dear kitty ; but for the intention only -- for the information , you must agree , is not likely to be at all agreeable . "
" that is to say , you do nt believe what i have told you ; is it not so ? "
" we have always some difficulty in believing such things , my pretty dear , were it only from self - love . "
" then you do nt believe me ? "
" i confess that unless you deign to give me some proof of what you advance-- "
" what do you think of this ? "
kitty drew a little note from her bosom .
" for me ? " said dartagnan , seizing the letter .
" no ; for another . "
" for another ? "
" yes . "
" his name ; his name ! " cried dartagnan .
" read the address . "
" monsieur el comte de wardes . "
the remembrance of the scene at st . germain presented itself to the mind of the presumptuous gascon . as quick as thought , he tore open the letter , in spite of the cry which kitty uttered on seeing what he was going to do , or rather , what he was doing .
" oh , good lord , monsieur chevalier , " said she , " what are you doing ? "
" i ? " said dartagnan ; " nothing , " and he read ,
" you have not answered my first note . are you indisposed , or have you forgotten the glances you favored me with at the ball of mme . de guise ?
you have an opportunity now , count ; do not allow it to escape . "
dartagnan became very pale ; he was wounded in his self - love : he thought that it was in his love .
" poor dear monsieur dartagnan , " said kitty , in a voice full of compassion , and pressing anew the young man s hand .
" you pity me , little one ? " said dartagnan .
" oh , yes , and with all my heart ; for i know what it is to be in love . "
" you know what it is to be in love ? " said dartagnan , looking at her for the first time with much attention .
" alas , yes . "
" well , then , instead of pitying me , you would do much better to assist me in avenging myself on your mistress . "
" and what sort of revenge would you take ? " " i would triumph over her , and supplant my rival . "
" i will never help you in that , monsieur chevalier , " said kitty , warmly .
" and why not ? " demanded dartagnan .
" for two reasons . "
" what ones ? "
" the first is that my mistress will never love you . "
" how do you know that ? "
" you have cut her to the heart . "
" i ? in what can i have offended her -- i who ever since i have known her have lived at her feet like a slave ? speak , i beg you ! "
" i will never confess that but to the man -- who should read to the bottom of my soul ! "
dartagnan looked at kitty for the second time .
the young girl had freshness and beauty which many duchesses would have purchased with their coronets .
" kitty , " said he , " i will read to the bottom of your soul when - ever you like ; do nt let that disturb you . "
and he gave her a kiss at which the poor girl became as red as a cherry .
" oh , no , " said kitty , " it is not me you love !
it is my mistress you love ; you told me so just now . "
" and does that hinder you from letting me know the second reason ? "
" the second reason , monsieur the chevalier , " replied kitty , emboldened by the kiss in the first place , and still further by the expression of the eyes of the young man , " is that in love , everyone for herself ! "
then only dartagnan remembered the languishing glances of kitty , her constantly meeting him in the antechamber , the corridor , or on the stairs , those touches of the hand every time she met him , and her deep sighs ; but absorbed by his desire to please the great lady , he had disdained the soubrette . he whose game is the eagle takes no heed of the sparrow .
but this time our gascon saw at a glance all the advantage to be derived from the love which kitty had just confessed so innocently , or so boldly : the interception of letters addressed to the comte de wardes , news on the spot , entrance at all hours into kitty s chamber , which was contiguous to her mistress s .
the perfidious deceiver was , as may plainly be perceived , already sacrificing , in intention , the poor girl in order to obtain milady , willy - nilly .
" well , " said he to the young girl , " are you willing , my dear kitty , that i should give you a proof of that love which you doubt ? "
" what love ? " asked the young girl .
" of that which i am ready to feel toward you . "
" and what is that proof ? "
" are you willing that i should this evening pass with you the time i generally spend with your mistress ? "
" oh , yes , " said kitty , clapping her hands , " very willing . "
" well , then , come here , my dear , " said dartagnan , establishing himself in an easy chair ; " come , and let me tell you that you are the prettiest soubrette i ever saw ! "
and he did tell her so much , and so well , that the poor girl , who asked nothing better than to believe him , did believe him .
nevertheless , to dartagnan s great astonishment , the pretty kitty defended herself resolutely .
time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks and defenses .
midnight sounded , and almost at the same time the bell was rung in milady s chamber .
" good god , " cried kitty , " there is my mistress calling me !
go ; go directly ! "
dartagnan rose , took his hat , as if it had been his intention to obey , then , opening quickly the door of a large closet instead of that leading to the staircase , he buried himself amid the robes and dressing gowns of milady .
" what are you doing ? " cried kitty .
dartagnan , who had secured the key , shut himself up in the closet without reply .
" well , " cried milady , in a sharp voice . " are you asleep , that you do nt answer when i ring ? "
and dartagnan heard the door of communication opened violently .
" here am i , milady , here am i ! " cried kitty , springing forward to meet her mistress .
both went into the bedroom , and as the door of communication remained open , dartagnan could hear milady for some time scolding her maid . she was at length appeased , and the conversation turned upon him while kitty was assisting her mistress .
" well , " said milady , " i have not seen our gascon this evening . "
" what , milady ! has he not come ? " said kitty .
" can he be inconstant before being happy ? "
" oh , no ; he must have been prevented by monsieur de treville or monsieur dessessart .
i understand my game , kitty ; i have this one safe . "
" what will you do with him , madame ? "
" what will i do with him ?
be easy , kitty , there is something between that man and me that he is quite ignorant of : he nearly made me lose my credit with his eminence .
oh , i will be revenged ! "
" i believed that madame loved him . "
" i love him ? i detest him !
an idiot , who held the life of lord de winter in his hands and did not kill him , by which i missed three hundred thousand livres  income . "
" that s true , " said kitty ; " your son was the only heir of his uncle , and until his majority you would have had the enjoyment of his fortune . "
dartagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave creature reproach him , with that sharp voice which she took such pains to conceal in conversation , for not having killed a man whom he had seen load her with kindnesses .
" for all this , " continued milady , " i should long ago have revenged myself on him if , and i do nt know why , the cardinal had not requested me to conciliate him . "
" oh , yes ; but madame has not conciliated that little woman he was so fond of . "
" what , the mercer s wife of the rue des fossoyeurs ? has he not already forgotten she ever existed ?
fine vengeance that , on my faith ! "
a cold sweat broke from dartagnan s brow . why , this woman was a monster !
he resumed his listening , but unfortunately the toilet was finished .
" that will do , " said milady ; " go into your own room , and tomorrow endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter i gave you . "
" for monsieur de wardes ? " said kitty .
" to be sure ; for monsieur de wardes . "
" now , there is one , " said kitty , " who appears to me quite a different sort of a man from that poor monsieur dartagnan . "
" go to bed , mademoiselle , " said milady ; " i do nt like comments . "
" the abominable creature , " murmured dartagnan .
" silence , silence , begone ! " said kitty . " there is nothing but a wainscot between my chamber and milady s ; every word that is uttered in one can be heard in the other . "
" that s exactly the reason i wo nt go , " said dartagnan .
" what ! " said kitty , blushing .
" or , at least , i will go -- later . " he drew kitty to him .
she had the less motive to resist , resistance would make so much noise . therefore kitty surrendered .
it was a movement of vengeance upon milady .
dartagnan believed it right to say that vengeance is the pleasure of the gods .
with a little more heart , he might have been contented with this new conquest ; but the principal features of his character were ambition and pride .
it must , however , be confessed in his justification that the first use he made of his influence over kitty was to try and find out what had become of mme . bonacieux ; but the poor girl swore upon the crucifix to dartagnan that she was entirely ignorant on that head , her mistress never admitting her into half her secrets -- only she believed she could say she was not dead .
as to the cause which was near making milady lose her credit with the cardinal , kitty knew nothing about it ; but this time dartagnan was better informed than she was . as he had seen milady on board a vessel at the moment he was leaving england , he suspected that it was , almost without a doubt , on account of the diamond studs .
but what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred , the profound hatred , the inveterate hatred of milady , was increased by his not having killed her brother - in - law .
dartagnan came the next day to milady s , and finding her in a very ill - humor , had no doubt that it was lack of an answer from m. de wardes that provoked her thus .
kitty came in , but milady was very cross with her .
the poor girl ventured a glance at dartagnan which said , " see how i suffer on your account ! "
toward the end of the evening , however , the beautiful lioness became milder ; she smilingly listened to the soft speeches of dartagnan , and even gave him her hand to kiss .
dartagnan departed , scarcely knowing what to think , but as he was a youth who did not easily lose his head , while continuing to pay his court to milady , he had framed a little plan in his mind .
he found kitty at the gate , and , as on the preceding evening , went up to her chamber .
kitty had been accused of negligence and severely scolded .
milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the comte de wardes , and she ordered kitty to come at nine oclock in the morning to take a third letter .
dartagnan made kitty promise to bring him that letter on the following morning . the poor girl promised all her lover desired ; she was mad .
things passed as on the night before . dartagnan concealed himself in his closet ; milady called , undressed , sent away kitty , and shut the door .
as the night before , dartagnan did not return home till five oclock in the morning .
at eleven oclock kitty came to him . she held in her hand a fresh billet from milady .
this time the poor girl did not even argue with dartagnan ; she gave it to him at once . she belonged body and soul to her handsome soldier .
dartagnan opened the letter and read as follows :
this is the third time i have written to you to tell you that i love you .
beware that i do not write to you a fourth time to tell you that i detest you .
if you repent of the manner in which you have acted toward me , the young girl who brings you this will tell you how a man of spirit may obtain his pardon .
dartagnan colored and grew pale several times in reading this billet .
" oh , you love her still , " said kitty , who had not taken her eyes off the young man s countenance for an instant .
i do not love her , but i will avenge myself for her contempt . "
" oh , yes , i know what sort of vengeance ! you told me that ! "
" what matters it to you , kitty ?
you know it is you alone whom i love . "
" how can i know that ? "
" by the scorn i will throw upon her . "
but now i am forced to believe in the excess of your kindness , since not only your letter but your servant assures me that i have the good fortune to be beloved by you .
she has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of spirit may obtain his pardon .
i will come and ask mine at eleven oclock this evening .
to delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit a fresh offense .
from him whom you have rendered the happiest of men , comte de wardes
this note was in the first place a forgery ; it was likewise an indelicacy . it was even , according to our present manners , something like an infamous action ; but at that period people did not manage affairs as they do today .
besides , dartagnan from her own admission knew milady culpable of treachery in matters more important , and could entertain no respect for her .
and yet , notwithstanding this want of respect , he felt an uncontrollable passion for this woman boiling in his veins -- passion drunk with contempt ; but passion or thirst , as the reader pleases .
dartagnan s plan was very simple . by kitty s chamber he could gain that of her mistress . he would take advantage of the first moment of surprise , shame , and terror , to triumph over her . he might fail , but something must be left to chance .
in eight days the campaign would open , and he would be compelled to leave paris ; dartagnan had no time for a prolonged love siege .
" there , " said the young man , handing kitty the letter sealed ; " give that to milady . it is the count s reply . "
poor kitty became as pale as death ; she suspected what the letter contained .
" listen , my dear girl , " said dartagnan ; " you can not but perceive that all this must end , some way or other . milady may discover that you gave the first billet to my lackey instead of to the count s ; that it is i who have opened the others which ought to have been opened by de wardes . milady will then turn you out of doors , and you know she is not the woman to limit her vengeance . "
" alas ! " said kitty , " for whom have i exposed myself to all that ? "
" for me , i well know , my sweet girl , " said dartagnan . " but i am grateful , i swear to you . "
" but what does this note contain ? "
" milady will tell you . "
" ah , you do not love me ! " cried kitty , " and i am very wretched . "
to this reproach there is always one response which deludes women . dartagnan replied in such a manner that kitty remained in her great delusion .
although she cried freely before deciding to transmit the letter to her mistress , she did at last so decide , which was all dartagnan wished .
finally he promised that he would leave her mistress s presence at an early hour that evening , and that when he left the mistress he would ascend with the maid .
this promise completed poor kitty s consolation .
34 in which the equipment of aramis and porthos is treated of
since the four friends had been each in search of his equipments , there had been no fixed meeting between them . they dined apart from one another , wherever they might happen to be , or rather where they could . duty likewise on its part took a portion of that precious time which was gliding away so rapidly -- only they had agreed to meet once a week , about one oclock , at the residence of athos , seeing that he , in agreement with the vow he had formed , did not pass over the threshold of his door .
this day of reunion was the same day as that on which kitty came to find dartagnan .
soon as kitty left him , dartagnan directed his steps toward the rue ferou .
he found athos and aramis philosophizing . aramis had some slight inclination to resume the cassock .
athos , according to his system , neither encouraged nor dissuaded him .
athos believed that everyone should be left to his own free will .
he never gave advice but when it was asked , and even then he required to be asked twice .
" people , in general , " he said , " only ask advice not to follow it ; or if they do follow it , it is for the sake of having someone to blame for having given it . "
porthos arrived a minute after dartagnan .
the four friends were reunited .
the four countenances expressed four different feelings : that of porthos , tranquillity ; that of dartagnan , hope ; that of aramis , uneasiness ; that of athos , carelessness .
at the end of a moment s conversation , in which porthos hinted that a lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his embarrassment , mousqueton entered .
he came to request his master to return to his lodgings , where his presence was urgent , as he piteously said .
" is it my equipment ? "
" yes and no , " replied mousqueton .
" well , but ca nt you speak ? "
" come , monsieur . "
porthos rose , saluted his friends , and followed mousqueton .
an instant after , bazin made his appearance at the door .
" what do you want with me , my friend ? " said aramis , with that mildness of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were directed toward the church .
" a man wishes to see monsieur at home , " replied bazin .
" a man ! what man ? "
" a mendicant . "
" give him alms , bazin , and bid him pray for a poor sinner . "
" this mendicant insists upon speaking to you , and pretends that you will be very glad to see him . "
" has he sent no particular message for me ? "
" yes . if monsieur aramis hesitates to come , " he said , " tell him i am from tours . "
" from tours ! " cried aramis . " a thousand pardons , gentlemen ; but no doubt this man brings me the news i expected . "
and rising also , he went off at a quick pace .
there remained athos and dartagnan .
" i believe these fellows have managed their business .
what do you think , dartagnan ? " said athos .
" i know that porthos was in a fair way , " replied dartagnan ; " and as to aramis to tell you the truth , i have never been seriously uneasy on his account . but you , my dear athos -- you , who so generously distributed the englishman s pistoles , which were our legitimate property -- what do you mean to do ? "
" i am satisfied with having killed that fellow , my boy , seeing that it is blessed bread to kill an englishman ; but if i had pocketed his pistoles , they would have weighed me down like a remorse .
" go to , my dear athos ; you have truly inconceivable ideas . "
" let it pass .
" that is to say , i visit an englishwoman -- the one i named . "
" oh , ay ! the fair woman on whose account i gave you advice , which naturally you took care not to adopt . "
" i gave you my reasons . "
" yes ; you look there for your outfit , i think you said . " " not at all .
i have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was concerned in the abduction of madame bonacieux . "
" yes , i understand now : to find one woman , you court another . it is the longest road , but certainly the most amusing . "
we will therefore leave the two friends , who had nothing important to say to each other , and follow aramis .
upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came from tours , we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed , or rather went before , bazin ; he ran without stopping from the rue ferou to the rue de vaugirard .
on entering he found a man of short stature and intelligent eyes , but covered with rags .
" you have asked for me ? " said the musketeer .
" i wish to speak with monsieur aramis . is that your name , monsieur ? "
" my very own . you have brought me something ? "
" yes , if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief . "
" here it is , " said aramis , taking a small key from his breast and opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pearl , " here it is . look . "
" that is right , " replied the mendicant ; " dismiss your lackey . "
in fact , bazin , curious to know what the mendicant could want with his master , kept pace with him as well as he could , and arrived almost at the same time he did ; but his quickness was not of much use to him . at the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire , and he was obliged to obey .
bazin gone , the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be sure that nobody could either see or hear him , and opening his ragged vest , badly held together by a leather strap , he began to rip the upper part of his doublet , from which he drew a letter .
aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal , kissed the superscription with an almost religious respect , and opened the epistle , which contained what follows :
" my friend , it is the will of fate that we should be still for some time separated ; but the delightful days of youth are not lost beyond return .
perform your duty in camp ; i will do mine elsewhere . accept that which the bearer brings you ; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman , and think of me , who kisses tenderly your black eyes .
" adieu ; or rather , au revoir . "
ps . you may behave politely to the bearer , who is a count and a grandee of spain !
" golden dreams ! " cried aramis .
" oh , beautiful life ! yes , we are young ; yes , we shall yet have happy days !
my love , my blood , my life ! all , all , all , are thine , my adored mistress ! "
and he kissed the letter with passion , without even vouchsafing a look at the gold which sparkled on the table .
bazin scratched at the door , and as aramis had no longer any reason to exclude him , he bade him come in .
bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold , and forgot that he came to announce dartagnan , who , curious to know who the mendicant could be , came to aramis on leaving athos .
now , as dartagnan used no ceremony with aramis , seeing that bazin forgot to announce him , he announced himself .
" the devil ! my dear aramis , " said dartagnan , " if these are the prunes that are sent to you from tours , i beg you will make my compliments to the gardener who gathers them . "
" you are mistaken , friend dartagnan , " said aramis , always on his guard ; " this is from my publisher , who has just sent me the price of that poem in one - syllable verse which i began yonder . "
" ah , indeed , " said dartagnan . " well , your publisher is very generous , my dear aramis , that s all i can say . "
" how , monsieur ? " cried bazin , " a poem sell so dear as that ! it is incredible !
oh , monsieur , you can write as much as you like ; you may become equal to monsieur de voiture and monsieur de benserade .
i like that .
a poet is as good as an abbe . ah !
monsieur aramis , become a poet , i beg of you . "
" bazin , my friend , " said aramis , " i believe you meddle with my conversation . "
bazin perceived he was wrong ; he bowed and went out .
" ah ! " said dartagnan with a smile , " you sell your productions at their weight in gold . you are very fortunate , my friend ; but take care or you will lose that letter which is peeping from your doublet , and which also comes , no doubt , from your publisher . "
aramis blushed to the eyes , crammed in the letter , and re - buttoned his doublet .
" my dear dartagnan , " said he , " if you please , we will join our friends ; as i am rich , we will today begin to dine together again , expecting that you will be rich in your turn . "
" my faith ! " said dartagnan , with great pleasure .
" it is long since we have had a good dinner ; and i , for my part , have a somewhat hazardous expedition for this evening , and shall not be sorry , i confess , to fortify myself with a few glasses of good old burgundy . "
and having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer the needs of the moment , he placed the others in the ebony box , inlaid with mother of pearl , in which was the famous handkerchief which served him as a talisman .
the two friends repaired to athos s , and he , faithful to his vow of not going out , took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them . as he was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy , dartagnan and aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him .
they went to find porthos , and at the corner of the rue bac met mousqueton , who , with a most pitiable air , was driving before him a mule and a horse .
dartagnan uttered a cry of surprise , which was not quite free from joy .
" ah , my yellow horse , " cried he .
" aramis , look at that horse ! "
" oh , the frightful brute ! " said aramis .
" ah , my dear , " replied dartagnan , " upon that very horse i came to paris . "
" what , does monsieur know this horse ? " said mousqueton .
" it is of an original color , " said aramis ; " i never saw one with such a hide in my life . "
" i can well believe it , " replied dartagnan , " and that was why i got three crowns for him . it must have been for his hide , for , certes , the carcass is not worth eighteen livres .
but how did this horse come into your bands , mousqueton ? "
" pray , " said the lackey , " say nothing about it , monsieur ; it is a frightful trick of the husband of our duchess ! "
" how is that , mousqueton ? "
" why , we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of quality , the duchesse de -- but , your pardon ; my master has commanded me to be discreet . she had forced us to accept a little souvenir , a magnificent spanish genet and an andalusian mule , which were beautiful to look upon . the husband heard of the affair ; on their way he confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us , and substituted these horrible animals . "
" which you are taking back to him ? " said dartagnan .
" exactly ! " replied mousqueton . " you may well believe that we will not accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been promised to us . "
" no , pardieu ; though i should like to have seen porthos on my yellow horse . that would give me an idea of how i looked when i arrived in paris .
but do nt let us hinder you , mousqueton ; go and perform your master s orders .
is he at home ? "
" yes , monsieur , " said mousqueton , " but in a very ill humor .
get up ! " he continued his way toward the quai des grands augustins , while the two friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate porthos .
he , having seen them crossing the yard , took care not to answer , and they rang in vain .
meanwhile mousqueton continued on his way , and crossing the pont neuf , still driving the two sorry animals before him , he reached the rue aux ours .
arrived there , he fastened , according to the orders of his master , both horse and mule to the knocker of the procurator s door ; then , without taking any thought for their future , he returned to porthos , and told him that his commission was completed .
in a short time the two unfortunate beasts , who had not eaten anything since the morning , made such a noise in raising and letting fall the knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged .
mme . coquenard recognized her present , and could not at first comprehend this restitution ; but the visit of porthos soon enlightened her .
the anger which fired the eyes of the musketeer , in spite of his efforts to suppress it , terrified his sensitive inamorata .
in fact , mousqueton had not concealed from his master that he had met dartagnan and aramis , and that dartagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the bearnese pony upon which he had come to paris , and which he had sold for three crowns .
porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the procurator s wife in the cloister of st . magloire .
the procurator , seeing he was going , invited him to dinner -- an invitation which the musketeer refused with a majestic air .
mme . coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of st . magloire , for she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there ; but she was fascinated by the lofty airs of porthos .
all that which a man wounded in his self - love could let fall in the shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of a woman porthos let fall upon the bowed head of the procurator s wife .
" alas , " said she , " i did all for the best !
one of our clients is a horsedealer ; he owes money to the office , and is backward in his pay . i took the mule and the horse for what he owed us ; he assured me that they were two noble steeds . "
" well , madame , " said porthos , " if he owed you more than five crowns , your horsedealer is a thief . "
" there is no harm in trying to buy things cheap , monsieur porthos , " said the procurator s wife , seeking to excuse herself .
" no , madame ; but they who so assiduously try to buy things cheap ought to permit others to seek more generous friends . "
and porthos , turning on his heel , made a step to retire . " monsieur porthos !
monsieur porthos ! " cried the procurator s wife . " i have been wrong ; i see it . i ought not to have driven a bargain when it was to equip a cavalier like you . "
porthos , without reply , retreated a second step .
the procurator s wife fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud , all surrounded by duchesses and marchionesses , who cast bags of money at his feet .
" stop , in the name of heaven , monsieur porthos ! " cried she . " stop , and let us talk . "
" talking with you brings me misfortune , " said porthos .
" but , tell me , what do you ask ? "
" nothing ; for that amounts to the same thing as if i asked you for something . "
" you should have left it to me , then , madame , who know what they are ; but you wished to be frugal , and consequently to lend at usury . "
" it was wrong , monsieur porthos ; but i will repair that wrong , upon my word of honor . "
" how so ? " asked the musketeer .
" listen . this evening m. coquenard is going to the house of the due de chaulnes , who has sent for him .
it is for a consultation , which will last three hours at least . come !
we shall be alone , and can make up our accounts . "
" in good time .
now you talk , my dear . " " you pardon me ? "
" we shall see , " said porthos , majestically ; and the two separated saying , " till this evening . "
" the devil ! " thought porthos , as he walked away , " it appears i am getting nearer to monsieur coquenard s strongbox at last . "
35 a gascon a match for cupid
the evening so impatiently waited for by porthos and by dartagnan at last arrived .
as was his custom , dartagnan presented himself at milady s at about nine oclock .
he found her in a charming humor . never had he been so well received .
our gascon knew , by the first glance of his eye , that his billet had been delivered , and that this billet had had its effect .
kitty entered to bring some sherbet .
her mistress put on a charming face , and smiled on her graciously ; but alas ! the poor girl was so sad that she did not even notice milady s condescension .
dartagnan knew what she wanted . she looked at the clock , rose , reseated herself , smiled at dartagnan with an air which said , " you are very amiable , no doubt , but you would be charming if you would only depart . "
dartagnan rose and took his hat ; milady gave him her hand to kiss . the young man felt her press his hand , and comprehended that this was a sentiment , not of coquetry , but of gratitude because of his departure .
" she loves him devilishly , " he murmured .
then he went out .
this time kitty was nowhere waiting for him ; neither in the antechamber , nor in the corridor , nor beneath the great door .
it was necessary that dartagnan should find alone the staircase and the little chamber .
she heard him enter , but she did not raise her head .
as dartagnan had presumed , on receiving his letter , milady in a delirium of joy had told her servant everything ; and by way of recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the commission , she had given kitty a purse .
returning to her own room , kitty had thrown the purse into a corner , where it lay open , disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet .
the poor girl , under the caresses of dartagnan , lifted her head .
dartagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance . she joined her hands with a suppliant air , but without venturing to speak a word .
as little sensitive as was the heart of dartagnan , he was touched by this mute sorrow ; but he held too tenaciously to his projects , above all to this one , to change the program which he had laid out in advance .
he did not therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch ; only he represented his action as one of simple vengeance .
for the rest this vengeance was very easy ; for milady , doubtless to conceal her blushes from her lover , had ordered kitty to extinguish all the lights in the apartment , and even in the little chamber itself .
before daybreak m. de wardes must take his departure , still in obscurity .
presently they heard milady retire to her room .
dartagnan slipped into the wardrobe .
hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded .
milady seemed overcome with joy , and made kitty repeat the smallest details of the pretended interview of the soubrette with de wardes when he received the letter ; how he had responded ; what was the expression of his face ; if he seemed very amorous . and to all these questions poor kitty , forced to put on a pleasant face , responded in a stifled voice whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark , solely because happiness is egotistical .
finally , as the hour for her interview with the count approached , milady had everything about her darkened , and ordered kitty to return to her own chamber , and introduce de wardes whenever he presented himself .
kitty s detention was not long .
hardly had dartagnan seen , through a crevice in his closet , that the whole apartment was in obscurity , than he slipped out of his concealment , at the very moment when kitty reclosed the door of communication .
" what is that noise ? " demanded milady .
" it is i , " said dartagnan in a subdued voice , " i , the comte de wardes . "
" oh , my god , my god ! " murmured kitty , " he has not even waited for the hour he himself named ! "
" well , " said milady , in a trembling voice , " why do you not enter ? count , count , " added she , " you know that i wait for you . "
at this appeal dartagnan drew kitty quietly away , and slipped into the chamber .
if rage or sorrow ever torture the heart , it is when a lover receives under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to his happy rival .
dartagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had not foreseen . jealousy gnawed his heart ; and he suffered almost as much as poor kitty , who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber .
" yes , count , " said milady , in her softest voice , and pressing his hand in her own , " i am happy in the love which your looks and your words have expressed to me every time we have met .
i also -- i love you .
oh , tomorrow , tomorrow , i must have some pledge from you which will prove that you think of me ; and that you may not forget me , take this ! " and she slipped a ring from her finger onto dartagnan s . dartagnan remembered having seen this ring on the finger of milady ; it was a magnificent sapphire , encircled with brilliants .
the first movement of dartagnan was to return it , but milady added , " no , no ! keep that ring for love of me .
besides , in accepting it , " she added , in a voice full of emotion , " you render me a much greater service than you imagine . "
" this woman is full of mysteries , " murmured dartagnan to himself .
at that instant he felt himself ready to reveal all .
he even opened his mouth to tell milady who he was , and with what a revengeful purpose he had come ; but she added , " poor angel , whom that monster of a gascon barely failed to kill . "
the monster was himself .
" oh , " continued milady , " do your wounds still make you suffer ? "
" yes , much , " said dartagnan , who did not well know how to answer .
" be tranquil , " murmured milady ; " i will avenge you -- and cruelly ! "
" peste ! " said dartagnan to himself , " the moment for confidences has not yet come . "
it took some time for dartagnan to resume this little dialogue ; but then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had completely vanished .
it was necessary to separate . dartagnan at the moment of quitting milady felt only the liveliest regret at the parting ; and as they addressed each other in a reciprocally passionate adieu , another interview was arranged for the following week .
poor kitty hoped to speak a few words to dartagnan when he passed through her chamber ; but milady herself reconducted him through the darkness , and only quit him at the staircase .
the next morning dartagnan ran to find athos .
he was engaged in an adventure so singular that he wished for counsel .
he therefore told him all .
" your milady , " said he , " appears to be an infamous creature , but not the less you have done wrong to deceive her . in one fashion or another you have a terrible enemy on your hands . "
while thus speaking athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with diamonds which had taken , on dartagnan s finger , the place of the queen s ring , carefully kept in a casket .
" you notice my ring ? " said the gascon , proud to display so rich a gift in the eyes of his friends .
" yes , " said athos , " it reminds me of a family jewel . "
" it is beautiful , is it not ? " said dartagnan .
" yes , " said athos , " magnificent . i did not think two sapphires of such a fine water existed .
have you traded it for your diamond ? " " no .
" that ring comes from milady ? " cried athos , with a voice in which it was easy to detect strong emotion .
" her very self ; she gave it me last night .
here it is , " replied dartagnan , taking it from his finger .
athos examined it and became very pale .
a shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of this gentleman .
" it is impossible it can be she , " said he . " how could this ring come into the hands of milady clarik ?
and yet it is difficult to suppose such a resemblance should exist between two jewels . "
" do you know this ring ? " said dartagnan .
" i thought i did , " replied athos ; " but no doubt i was mistaken . "
and he returned dartagnan the ring without , however , ceasing to look at it .
" pray , dartagnan , " said athos , after a minute , " either take off that ring or turn the mounting inside ; it recalls such cruel recollections that i shall have no head to converse with you .
do nt ask me for counsel ; do nt tell me you are perplexed what to do .
but stop ! let me look at that sapphire again ; the one i mentioned to you had one of its faces scratched by accident . "
dartagnan took off the ring , giving it again to athos .
athos started .
" but from whom did this ring come to you , athos ? "
" from my mother , who inherited it from her mother .
as i told you , it is an old family jewel . "
" no , " replied athos , with a singular smile .
" i gave it away in a night of love , as it has been given to you . "
dartagnan became pensive in his turn ; it appeared as if there were abysses in milady s soul whose depths were dark and unknown .
he took back the ring , but put it in his pocket and not on his finger .
" dartagnan , " said athos , taking his hand , " you know i love you ; if i had a son i could not love him better .
take my advice , renounce this woman .
i do not know her , but a sort of intuition tells me she is a lost creature , and that there is something fatal about her . "
" you are right , " said dartagnan ; " i will have done with her .
" shall you have the courage ? " said athos .
" i shall , " replied dartagnan , " and instantly . "
" in truth , my young friend , you will act rightly , " said the gentleman , pressing the gascon s hand with an affection almost paternal ; " and god grant that this woman , who has scarcely entered into your life , may not leave a terrible trace in it ! "
and athos bowed to dartagnan like a man who wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left alone with his thoughts .
on reaching home dartagnan found kitty waiting for him .
a month of fever could not have changed her more than this one night of sleeplessness and sorrow .
she was sent by her mistress to the false de wardes .
as a reply , he wrote the following letter :
when your turn comes , i shall have the honor to inform you of it .
i kiss your hands .
comte de wardes
it would be wrong to judge the actions of one period from the point of view of another .
that which would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that time quite a simple and natural affair , and the younger sons of the best families were frequently supported by their mistresses .
dartagnan gave the open letter to kitty , who at first was unable to comprehend it , but who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time .
she could scarcely believe in her happiness ; and dartagnan was forced to renew with the living voice the assurances which he had written . and whatever might be -- considering the violent character of milady -- the danger which the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her mistress , she ran back to the place royale as fast as her legs could carry her .
the heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival .
she crushed the paper in her hand , and turning with flashing eyes upon kitty , she cried , " what is this letter ? "
" the answer to madame s , " replied kitty , all in a tremble .
" impossible ! " cried milady .
" it is impossible a gentleman could have written such a letter to a woman . "
" what do you want with me ? " said she , " and why do you place your hand on me ? "
" i thought that madame was ill , and i wished to bring her help , " responded the maid , frightened at the terrible expression which had come over her mistress s face . " i faint ? i ?
i ? do you take me for half a woman ?
when i am insulted i do not faint ; i avenge myself ! "
and she made a sign for kitty to leave the room .
36 dream of vengeance
that evening milady gave orders that when m. dartagnan came as usual , he should be immediately admitted ; but he did not come .
the next day kitty went to see the young man again , and related to him all that had passed on the preceding evening . dartagnan smiled ; this jealous anger of milady was his revenge .
that evening milady was still more impatient than on the preceding evening . she renewed the order relative to the gascon ; but as before she expected him in vain .
the next morning , when kitty presented herself at dartagnan s , she was no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days ; but on the contrary sad as death .
dartagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her ; but she , as her only reply , drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him .
this letter was in milady s handwriting ; only this time it was addressed to m. dartagnan , and not to m. de wardes .
he opened it and read as follows :
dear m. dartagnan , it is wrong thus to neglect your friends , particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a time .
my brother - in - law and myself expected you yesterday and the day before , but in vain .
will it be the same this evening ?
your very grateful , milady clarik
" that s all very simple , " said dartagnan ; " i expected this letter .
my credit rises by the fall of that of the comte de wardes . "
" and will you go ? " asked kitty .
" listen to me , my dear girl , " said the gascon , who sought for an excuse in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made athos ; " you must understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive invitation .
milady , not seeing me come again , would not be able to understand what could cause the interruption of my visits , and might suspect something ; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman would go ? "
" oh , my god ! " said kitty , " you know how to represent things in such a way that you are always in the right .
you are going now to pay your court to her again , and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in your own name and with your own face , it will be much worse than before . "
as nine oclock sounded , dartagnan was at the place royale .
it was evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned , for as soon as dartagnan appeared , before even he had asked if milady were visible , one of them ran to announce him .
" show him in , " said milady , in a quick tone , but so piercing that dartagnan heard her in the antechamber .
he was introduced .
" i am at home to nobody , " said milady ; " observe , to nobody . "
the servant went out .
dartagnan approached her with his usual gallantry . she then made an extraordinary effort to receive him , but never did a more distressed countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile .
to the questions which dartagnan put concerning her health , she replied , " bad , very bad . "
" then , " replied he , " my visit is ill - timed ; you , no doubt , stand in need of repose , and i will withdraw . "
" no , no ! " said milady . " on the contrary , stay , monsieur dartagnan ; your agreeable company will divert me . "
" oh , oh ! " thought dartagnan . " she has never been so kind before . on guard ! "
milady assumed the most agreeable air possible , and conversed with more than her usual brilliancy .
at the same time the fever , which for an instant abandoned her , returned to give luster to her eyes , color to her cheeks , and vermillion to her lips .
dartagnan was again in the presence of the circe who had before surrounded him with her enchantments .
his love , which he believed to be extinct but which was only asleep , awoke again in his heart .
milady smiled , and dartagnan felt that he could damn himself for that smile .
by degrees , milady became more communicative .
she asked dartagnan if he had a mistress .
" alas ! " said dartagnan , with the most sentimental air he could assume , " can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me -- to me , who , from the moment i saw you , have only breathed and sighed through you and for you ? "
milady smiled with a strange smile .
" then you love me ? " said she .
" have i any need to tell you so ? have you not perceived it ? "
" it may be ; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture , the more difficult they are to be won . "
" oh , difficulties do not affright me , " said dartagnan . " i shrink before nothing but impossibilities . "
" nothing is impossible , " replied milady , " to true love . "
" nothing , madame ? "
" nothing , " replied milady .
" the devil ! " thought dartagnan . " the note is changed .
is she going to fall in love with me , by chance , this fair inconstant ; and will she be disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me for de wardes ? "
dartagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to milady s .
" well , now , " she said , " let us see what you would do to prove this love of which you speak . "
" all that could be required of me .
order ; i am ready . "
" for everything ? "
" for everything , " cried dartagnan , who knew beforehand that he had not much to risk in engaging himself thus .
" well , now let us talk a little seriously , " said milady , in her turn drawing her armchair nearer to dartagnan s chair .
" i am all attention , madame , " said he .
milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment ; then , as if appearing to have formed a resolution , she said , " i have an enemy . "
" you , madame ! " said dartagnan , affecting surprise ; " is that possible , my god?--good and beautiful as you are ! "
" a mortal enemy . "
" indeed ! "
" an enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is war to the death .
may i reckon on you as an auxiliary ? "
dartagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature wished to reach .
" you may , madame , " said he , with emphasis . " my arm and my life belong to you , like my love . "
" then , " said milady , " since you are as generous as you are loving-- "
she stopped .
" well ? " demanded dartagnan .
" well , " replied milady , after a moment of silence , " from the present time , cease to talk of impossibilities . "
" do not overwhelm me with happiness , " cried dartagnan , throwing himself on his knees , and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to him .
" avenge me of that infamous de wardes , " said milady , between her teeth , " and i shall soon know how to get rid of you -- you double idiot , you animated sword blade ! "
" fall voluntarily into my arms , hypocritical and dangerous woman , " said dartagnan , likewise to himself , " after having abused me with such effrontery , and afterward i will laugh at you with him whom you wish me to kill . "
dartagnan lifted up his head .
" i am ready , " said he .
" you have understood me , then , dear monsieur dartagnan , " said milady .
" i could interpret one of your looks . "
" then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so much renown ? "
" instantly ! "
" but on my part , " said milady , " how should i repay such a service ? i know these lovers . they are men who do nothing for nothing . "
" you know the only reply that i desire , " said dartagnan , " the only one worthy of you and of me ! "
and he drew nearer to her .
she scarcely resisted .
" interested man ! " cried she , smiling .
" well , merit this pretended happiness , then ! "
" i am at your orders , " said dartagnan .
" quite certain ? " said milady , with a last doubt .
" only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your beautiful eyes ! "
" who told you that i had been weeping ? " said she .
" it appeared to me-- "
" such women as i never weep , " said milady .
" so much the better !
come , tell me his name ! "
" remember that his name is all my secret . "
" yet i must know his name . "
" yes , you must ; see what confidence i have in you ! "
" you overwhelm me with joy .
what is his name ? "
" you know him . "
" indeed . "
" if it were one of your friends you would hesitate , then ? " cried milady ; and a threatening glance darted from her eyes .
" not if it were my own brother ! " cried dartagnan , as if carried away by his enthusiasm .
our gascon promised this without risk , for he knew all that was meant .
" i love your devotedness , " said milady .
" alas , do you love nothing else in me ? " asked dartagnan .
" i love you also , you ! " said she , taking his hand .
the warm pressure made dartagnan tremble , as if by the touch that fever which consumed milady attacked himself .
" you love me , you ! " cried he .
" oh , if that were so , i should lose my reason ! "
and he folded her in his arms .
she made no effort to remove her lips from his kisses ; only she did not respond to them .
her lips were cold ; it appeared to dartagnan that he had embraced a statue .
he was not the less intoxicated with joy , electrified by love . he almost believed in the tenderness of milady ; he almost believed in the crime of de wardes .
if de wardes had at that moment been under his hand , he would have killed him .
milady seized the occasion .
" his name is-- " said she , in her turn .
" de wardes ; i know it , " cried dartagnan .
" and how do you know it ? " asked milady , seizing both his hands , and endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart .
dartagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away , and that he had committed an error .
" tell me , tell me , tell me , i say , " repeated milady , " how do you know it ? "
" how do i know it ? " said dartagnan .
" yes . "
" i know it because yesterday monsieur de wardes , in a saloon where i was , showed a ring which he said he had received from you . "
" wretch ! " cried milady .
the epithet , as may be easily understood , resounded to the very bottom of dartagnan s heart .
" well ? " continued she .
" well , i will avenge you of this wretch , " replied dartagnan , giving himself the airs of don japhet of armenia .
" thanks , my brave friend ! " cried milady ; " and when shall i be avenged ? "
" tomorrow -- immediately -- when you please ! "
milady was about to cry out , " immediately , " but she reflected that such precipitation would not be very gracious toward dartagnan .
besides , she had a thousand precautions to take , a thousand counsels to give to her defender , in order that he might avoid explanations with the count before witnesses .
all this was answered by an expression of dartagnan s .
" tomorrow , " said he , " you will be avenged , or i shall be dead . "
" no , " said she , " you will avenge me ; but you will not be dead .
he is a coward . "
" with women , perhaps ; but not with men .
i know something of him . "
" but it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in your contest with him . "
" fortune is a courtesan ; favorable yesterday , she may turn her back tomorrow . "
" which means that you now hesitate ? "
" no , i do not hesitate ; god forbid ! but would it be just to allow me to go to a possible death without having given me at least something more than hope ? "
milady answered by a glance which said , " is that all?--speak , then . "
and then accompanying the glance with explanatory words , " that is but too just , " said she , tenderly .
" oh , you are an angel ! " exclaimed the young man .
" then all is agreed ? " said she .
" except that which i ask of you , dear love . "
" but when i assure you that you may rely on my tenderness ? "
" silence ! i hear my brother .
it will be useless for him to find you here . "
she rang the bell and kitty appeared .
" go out this way , " said she , opening a small private door , " and come back at eleven oclock ; we will then terminate this conversation . kitty will conduct you to my chamber . "
the poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words .
" well , mademoiselle , what are you thinking about , standing there like a statue ?
" it appears that these appointments are all made for eleven oclock , " thought dartagnan ; " that s a settled custom . "
milady held out her hand to him , which he kissed tenderly .
" but , " said he , as he retired as quickly as possible from the reproaches of kitty , " i must not play the fool . this woman is certainly a great liar .
i must take care . " 37 milady s secret
dartagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to kitty s chamber , as she endeavored to persuade him to do -- and that for two reasons : the first , because by this means he should escape reproaches , recriminations , and prayers ; the second , because he was not sorry to have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring , if possible , to fathom those of this woman .
what was most clear in the matter was that dartagnan loved milady like a madman , and that she did not love him at all .
in an instant dartagnan perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home and write milady a long letter , in which he would confess to her that he and de wardes were , up to the present moment absolutely the same , and that consequently he could not undertake , without committing suicide , to kill the comte de wardes .
he walked six or seven times round the place royale , turning at every ten steps to look at the light in milady s apartment , which was to be seen through the blinds . it was evident that this time the young woman was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the first .
at length the light disappeared .
with this light was extinguished the last irresolution in the heart of dartagnan . he recalled to his mind the details of the first night , and with a beating heart and a brain on fire he re - entered the hotel and flew toward kitty s chamber .
the poor girl , pale as death and trembling in all her limbs , wished to delay her lover ; but milady , with her ear on the watch , had heard the noise dartagnan had made , and opening the door , said , " come in . "
all this was of such incredible immodesty , of such monstrous effrontery , that dartagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what he heard .
he imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic intrigues one meets in dreams .
he , however , darted not the less quickly toward milady , yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises over iron .
as the door closed after them kitty rushed toward it .
this last thought of love counseled her to make this last sacrifice .
dartagnan , on his part , had gained the summit of all his wishes . it was no longer a rival who was beloved ; it was himself who was apparently beloved .
a secret voice whispered to him , at the bottom of his heart , that he was but an instrument of vengeance , that he was only caressed till he had given death ; but pride , but self - love , but madness silenced this voice and stifled its murmurs .
and then our gascon , with that large quantity of conceit which we know he possessed , compared himself with de wardes , and asked himself why , after all , he should not be beloved for himself ?
he was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment .
milady was no longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment terrified him ; she was an ardent , passionate mistress , abandoning herself to love which she also seemed to feel .
two hours thus glided away .
when the transports of the two lovers were calmer , milady , who had not the same motives for forgetfulness that dartagnan had , was the first to return to reality , and asked the young man if the means which were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and de wardes were already arranged in his mind .
but dartagnan , whose ideas had taken quite another course , forgot himself like a fool , and answered gallantly that it was too late to think about duels and sword thrusts .
this coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind terrified milady , whose questions became more pressing .
then dartagnan , who had never seriously thought of this impossible duel , endeavored to turn the conversation ; but he could not succeed .
milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her irresistible spirit and her iron will .
dartagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising milady to renounce , by pardoning de wardes , the furious projects she had formed .
but at the first word the young woman started , and exclaimed in a sharp , bantering tone , which sounded strangely in the darkness , " are you afraid , dear monsieur dartagnan ? "
" you can not think so , dear love ! " replied dartagnan ; " but now , suppose this poor comte de wardes were less guilty than you think him ? "
" at all events , " said milady , seriously , " he has deceived me , and from the moment he deceived me , he merited death . "
" he shall die , then , since you condemn him ! " said dartagnan , in so firm a tone that it appeared to milady an undoubted proof of devotion .
this reassured her .
we can not say how long the night seemed to milady , but dartagnan believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through the window blinds , and invaded the chamber with its paleness .
seeing dartagnan about to leave her , milady recalled his promise to avenge her on the comte de wardes .
" i am quite ready , " said dartagnan ; " but in the first place i should like to be certain of one thing . "
" and what is that ? " asked milady .
" that is , whether you really love me ? "
" i have given you proof of that , it seems to me . "
" and i am yours , body and soul ! "
" thanks , my brave lover ; but as you are satisfied of my love , you must , in your turn , satisfy me of yours .
is it not so ? "
" what have i to fear ? "
" why , that i may be dangerously wounded -- killed even . "
" impossible ! " cried milady , " you are such a valiant man , and such an expert swordsman . "
" you would not , then , prefer a method , " resumed dartagnan , " which would equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless ? "
milady looked at her lover in silence . the pale light of the first rays of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression .
" really , " said she , " i believe you now begin to hesitate . "
" no , i do not hesitate ; but i really pity this poor comte de wardes , since you have ceased to love him . i think that a man must be so severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no other chastisement . "
" who told you that i loved him ? " asked milady , sharply .
" at least , i am now at liberty to believe , without too much fatuity , that you love another , " said the young man , in a caressing tone , " and i repeat that i am really interested for the count . "
" you ? " asked milady .
" yes , i. "
" and why you ? "
" because i alone know-- "
" what ? "
" that he is far from being , or rather having been , so guilty toward you as he appears . "
" indeed ! " said milady , in an anxious tone ; " explain yourself , for i really can not tell what you mean . "
and she looked at dartagnan , who embraced her tenderly , with eyes which seemed to burn themselves away .
" yes ; i am a man of honor , " said dartagnan , determined to come to an end , " and since your love is mine , and i am satisfied i possess it -- for i do possess it , do i not ? "
" entirely ; go on . "
" well , i feel as if transformed -- a confession weighs on my mind . "
" a confession ! "
" if i had the least doubt of your love i would not make it , but you love me , my beautiful mistress , do you not ? "
" without doubt . "
" then if through excess of love i have rendered myself culpable toward you , you will pardon me ? "
" perhaps . "
dartagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips to milady s , but she evaded him .
" this confession , " said she , growing paler , " what is this confession ? "
" you gave de wardes a meeting on thursday last in this very room , did you not ? " " no , no !
it is not true , " said milady , in a tone of voice so firm , and with a countenance so unchanged , that if dartagnan had not been in such perfect possession of the fact , he would have doubted .
" do not lie , my angel , " said dartagnan , smiling ; " that would be useless . "
" what do you mean ? speak ! you kill me . "
" be satisfied ; you are not guilty toward me , and i have already pardoned you . "
" what next ? what next ? "
" de wardes can not boast of anything . "
" how is that ?
you told me yourself that that ring-- "
" that ring i have !
the comte de wardes of thursday and the dartagnan of today are the same person . "
the imprudent young man expected a surprise , mixed with shame -- a slight storm which would resolve itself into tears ; but he was strangely deceived , and his error was not of long duration .
pale and trembling , milady repulsed dartagnan s attempted embrace by a violent blow on the chest , as she sprang out of bed .
dartagnan detained her by her night dress of fine india linen , to implore her pardon ; but she , with a strong movement , tried to escape .
then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders ; and on one of those lovely shoulders , round and white , dartagnan recognized , with inexpressible astonishment , the fleur - de - lis -- that indelible mark which the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted .
" great god ! " cried dartagnan , loosing his hold of her dress , and remaining mute , motionless , and frozen .
but milady felt herself denounced even by his terror . he had doubtless seen all .
she turned upon him , no longer like a furious woman , but like a wounded panther .
" ah , wretch ! " cried she , " you have basely betrayed me , and still more , you have my secret !
you shall die . "
and she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing table , opened it with a feverish and trembling hand , drew from it a small poniard , with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade , and then threw herself with a bound upon dartagnan .
although the young man was brave , as we know , he was terrified at that wild countenance , those terribly dilated pupils , those pale cheeks , and those bleeding lips . he recoiled to the other side of the room as he would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him , and his sword coming in contact with his nervous hand , he drew it almost unconsciously from the scabbard .
but without taking any heed of the sword , milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him , and did not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat .
she then tried to seize the sword with her hands ; but dartagnan kept it free from her grasp , and presenting the point , sometimes at her eyes , sometimes at her breast , compelled her to glide behind the bedstead , while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to kitty s apartment .
milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury , screaming in a formidable way .
as all this , however , bore some resemblance to a duel , dartagnan began to recover himself little by little .
" well , beautiful lady , very well , " said he ; " but , pardieu , if you do nt calm yourself , i will design a second fleur - de - lis upon one of those pretty cheeks ! "
" scoundrel , infamous scoundrel ! " howled milady .
but dartagnan , still keeping on the defensive , drew near to kitty s door .
then milady attempted to tear down the doorcase , with a strength apparently above that of a woman ; but finding she could not accomplish this , she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard , the point of which repeatedly glittered through the wood .
every blow was accompanied with terrible imprecations .
" but you ca nt go out so , " said kitty ; " you are naked . "
she gave him some slippers , in which he placed his naked feet , and then conducted him down the stairs .
it was time .
the young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent gesture .
the moment she lost sight of him , milady tumbled fainting into her chamber .
dartagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of what might become of kitty he ran at full speed across half paris , and did not stop till he came to athos s door .
the confusion of his mind , the terror which spurred him on , the cries of some of the patrol who started in pursuit of him , and the hooting of the people who , notwithstanding the early hour , were going to their work , only made him precipitate his course .
he crossed the court , ran up the two flights to athos s apartment , and knocked at the door enough to break it down .
" holloa , there ! " cried he ; " what do you want , you strumpet ?
what s your business here , you hussy ? "
dartagnan threw off his hood , and disengaged his hands from the folds of the cloak .
he then concluded it must be an assassin .
" help ! murder ! help ! " cried he .
" hold your tongue , you stupid fellow ! " said the young man ; " i am dartagnan ; do nt you know me ?
where is your master ? "
" you , monsieur dartagnan ! " cried grimaud , " impossible . "
" grimaud , " said athos , coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown , " grimaud , i thought i heard you permitting yourself to speak ? "
" ah , monsieur , it is-- "
" silence ! "
grimaud contented himself with pointing dartagnan out to his master with his finger .
athos recognized his comrade , and phlegmatic as he was , he burst into a laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his eyes -- petticoats falling over his shoes , sleeves tucked up , and mustaches stiff with agitation .
and he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a real appearance of terror , that athos eagerly seized his hand , crying , " are you wounded , my friend ?
how pale you are ! "
" no , but i have just met with a terrible adventure !
are you alone , athos ? "
" well , well ! " and dartagnan rushed into athos s chamber .
" is the king dead ?
have you killed the cardinal ? you are quite upset !
" athos , " said dartagnan , getting rid of his female garments , and appearing in his shirt , " prepare yourself to hear an incredible , an unheard - of story . "
" well , but put on this dressing gown first , " said the musketeer to his friend .
dartagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could , mistaking one sleeve for the other , so greatly was he still agitated .
" well ? " said athos .
" well , " replied dartagnan , bending his mouth to athos s ear , and lowering his voice , " milady is marked with a fleur - de - lis upon her shoulder ! "
" ah ! " cried the musketeer , as if he had received a ball in his heart .
" let us see , " said dartagnan . " are you sure that the other is dead ? "
" the other ? " said athos , in so stifled a voice that dartagnan scarcely heard him .
" yes , she of whom you told me one day at amiens . "
athos uttered a groan , and let his head sink on his hands .
" this is a woman of twenty - six or twenty - eight years . "
" fair , " said athos , " is she not ? "
" very . "
" blue and clear eyes , of a strange brilliancy , with black eyelids and eyebrows ? "
" yes . "
" tall , well - made ?
she has lost a tooth , next to the eyetooth on the left ? "
" yes . "
" the fleur - de - lis is small , rosy in color , and looks as if efforts had been made to efface it by the application of poultices ? "
" yes . "
" but you say she is english ? "
" she is called milady , but she may be french .
lord de winter is only her brother - in - law . "
" i will see her , dartagnan ! "
" beware , athos , beware . you tried to kill her ; she is a woman to return you the like , and not to fail . "
" she will not dare to say anything ; that would be to denounce herself . "
" she is capable of anything or everything .
did you ever see her furious ? "
" no , " said athos .
" a tigress , a panther !
ah , my dear athos , i am greatly afraid i have drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us ! "
dartagnan then related all -- the mad passion of milady and her menaces of death .
" you are right ; and upon my soul , i would give my life for a hair , " said athos .
" fortunately , the day after tomorrow we leave paris . we are going according to all probability to la rochelle , and once gone-- "
" she will follow you to the end of the world , athos , if she recognizes you .
let her , then , exhaust her vengeance on me alone ! " " my dear friend , of what consequence is it if she kills me ? " said athos .
" there is something horribly mysterious under all this , athos ; this woman is one of the cardinal s spies , i am sure of that . "
" in that case , take care !
if the cardinal does not hold you in high admiration for the affair of london , he entertains a great hatred for you ; but as , considering everything , he can not accuse you openly , and as hatred must be satisfied , particularly when it s a cardinal s hatred , take care of yourself .
if you go out , do not go out alone ; when you eat , use every precaution . mistrust everything , in short , even your own shadow . "
" fortunately , " said dartagnan , " all this will be only necessary till after tomorrow evening , for when once with the army , we shall have , i hope , only men to dread . "
" in the meantime , " said athos , " i renounce my plan of seclusion , and wherever you go , i will go with you . you must return to the rue des fossoyeurs ; i will accompany you . "
" but however near it may be , " replied dartagnan , " i can not go thither in this guise . "
" that s true , " said athos , and he rang the bell .
grimaud entered .
athos made him a sign to go to dartagnan s residence , and bring back some clothes .
grimaud replied by another sign that he understood perfectly , and set off .
" all this will not advance your outfit , " said athos ; " for if i am not mistaken , you have left the best of your apparel with milady , and she will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you .
fortunately , you have the sapphire . "
" the jewel is yours , my dear athos ! did you not tell me it was a family jewel ? "
" yes , my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it , as he once told me . it formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife , and it is magnificent .
my mother gave it to me , and i , fool as i was , instead of keeping the ring as a holy relic , gave it to this wretch . "
" then , my friend , take back this ring , to which i see you attach much value . "
" i take back the ring , after it has passed through the hands of that infamous creature ? never ; that ring is defiled , dartagnan . "
" sell it , then . "
" sell a jewel which came from my mother ! i vow i should consider it a profanation . "
" pledge it , then ; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it .
athos smiled .
" you are a capital companion , dartagnan , " said be ; " your never - failing cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction .
well , let us pledge the ring , but upon one condition . "
" what ? "
" that there shall be five hundred crowns for you , and five hundred crowns for me . "
" do nt dream it , athos . i do nt need the quarter of such a sum -- i who am still only in the guards -- and by selling my saddles , i shall procure it .
what do i want ?
a horse for planchet , that s all .
besides , you forget that i have a ring likewise . "
" to which you attach more value , it seems , than i do to mine ; at least , i have thought so . "
" yes , for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us from some great embarrassment , but even a great danger . it is not only a valuable diamond , but it is an enchanted talisman . "
" i do nt at all understand you , but i believe all you say to be true .
" well , i will take it , then , " said dartagnan .
at this moment grimaud returned , accompanied by planchet ; the latter , anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him , had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself .
dartagnan dressed himself , and athos did the same . when the two were ready to go out , the latter made grimaud the sign of a man taking aim , and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon , and prepared to follow his master .
they arrived without accident at the rue des fossoyeurs .
bonacieux was standing at the door , and looked at dartagnan hatefully .
" make haste , dear lodger , " said he ; " there is a very pretty girl waiting for you upstairs ; and you know women do nt like to be kept waiting . "
" that s kitty ! " said dartagnan to himself , and darted into the passage .
sure enough !
remember , it is you who have ruined me ! "
but what happened after my departure ? " " how can i tell ! " said kitty .
" the lackeys were brought by the cries she made .
she was mad with passion .
then i thought she would remember it was through my chamber you had penetrated hers , and that then she would suppose i was your accomplice ; so i took what little money i had and the best of my things , and i got away .
" poor dear girl !
but what can i do with you ?
i am going away the day after tomorrow . "
" do what you please , monsieur chevalier . help me out of paris ; help me out of france ! "
" i can not take you , however , to the siege of la rochelle , " aid dartagnan .
" no ; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of your acquaintance -- in your own country , for instance . "
" my dear little love ! in my country the ladies do without chambermaids . but stop !
i can manage your business for you .
planchet , go and find aramis . request him to come here directly .
we have something very important to say to him . "
" i understand , " said athos ; " but why not porthos ?
i should have thought that his duchess-- "
" oh , porthos s duchess is dressed by her husband s clerks , " said dartagnan , laughing .
" besides , kitty would not like to live in the rue aux ours . is nt it so , kitty ? "
" i do not care where i live , " said kitty , " provided i am well concealed , and nobody knows where i am . "
" meanwhile , kitty , when we are about to separate , and you are no longer jealous of me-- "
" monsieur chevalier , far off or near , " said kitty , " i shall always love you . "
" where the devil will constancy niche itself next ? " murmured athos .
" and i , also , " said dartagnan , " i also . i shall always love you ; be sure of that .
but now answer me .
i attach great importance to the question i am about to put to you . did you never hear talk of a young woman who was carried off one night ? "
" there , now !
oh , monsieur chevalier , do you love that woman still ? "
" no , no ; it is one of my friends who loves her -- monsieur athos , this gentleman here . "
" i ? " cried athos , with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is about to tread upon an adder .
" you , to be sure ! " said dartagnan , pressing athos s hand .
" you know the interest we both take in this poor little madame bonacieux .
besides , kitty will tell nothing ; will you , kitty ?
you understand , my dear girl , " continued dartagnan , " she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw at the door as you came in . "
" oh , my god ! you remind me of my fright ! if he should have known me again ! "
" how ? know you again ? did you ever see that man before ? "
" he came twice to milady s . "
" that s it .
about what time ? "
" why , about fifteen or eighteen days ago . "
" exactly so . "
" and yesterday evening he came again . "
" yesterday evening ? "
" yes , just before you came . "
" my dear athos , we are enveloped in a network of spies .
and do you believe he knew you again , kitty ? "
" i pulled down my hood as soon as i saw him , but perhaps it was too late . "
" go down , athos -- he mistrusts you less than me -- and see if he be still at his door . "
athos went down and returned immediately .
" he has gone , " said he , " and the house door is shut . "
" he has gone to make his report , and to say that all the pigeons are at this moment in the dovecot . "
" well , then , let us all fly , " said athos , " and leave nobody here but planchet to bring us news . "
" a minute .
aramis , whom we have sent for ! "
" that s true , " said athos ; " we must wait for aramis . "
at that moment aramis entered .
the matter was all explained to him , and the friends gave him to understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for kitty .
aramis reflected for a minute , and then said , coloring , " will it be really rendering you a service , dartagnan ? "
" i shall be grateful to you all my life . " " very well .
madame de bois - tracy asked me , for one of her friends who resides in the provinces , i believe , for a trustworthy maid . if you can , my dear dartagnan , answer for mademoiselle- "
" oh , monsieur , be assured that i shall be entirely devoted to the person who will give me the means of quitting paris . "
" then , " said aramis , " this falls out very well . "
he placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed with a ring , and gave the billet to kitty .
" and now , my dear girl , " said dartagnan , " you know that it is not good for any of us to be here .
therefore let us separate .
we shall meet again in better days . "
" and whenever we find each other , in whatever place it may be , " said kitty , " you will find me loving you as i love you today . "
" dicers  oaths ! " said athos , while dartagnan went to conduct kitty downstairs .
an instant afterward the three young men separated , agreeing to meet again at four oclock with athos , and leaving planchet to guard the house .
aramis returned home , and athos and dartagnan busied themselves about pledging the sapphire .
as the gascon had foreseen , they easily obtained three hundred pistoles on the ring .
still further , the jew told them that if they would sell it to him , as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings , he would give five hundred pistoles for it .
athos and dartagnan , with the activity of two soldiers and the knowledge of two connoisseurs , hardly required three hours to purchase the entire equipment of the musketeer .
besides , athos was very easy , and a noble to his fingers  ends .
when a thing suited him he paid the price demanded , without thinking to ask for any abatement .
the musketeer met with a superb andalusian horse , black as jet , nostrils of fire , legs clean and elegant , rising six years .
he examined him , and found him sound and without blemish .
they asked a thousand livres for him .
he might perhaps have been bought for less ; but while dartagnan was discussing the price with the dealer , athos was counting out the money on the table .
grimaud had a stout , short picard cob , which cost three hundred livres .
but athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders .
" how much did the jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased it ? " said athos .
" five hundred pistoles . "
" that is to say , two hundred more -- a hundred pistoles for you and a hundred pistoles for me .
" what ! will you-- "
go and tell him the ring is his , dartagnan , and bring back the two hundred pistoles with you . "
" reflect , athos ! "
" ready money is needful for the present time , and we must learn how to make sacrifices .
go , dartagnan , go ; grimaud will accompany you with his musketoon . "
a half hour afterward , dartagnan returned with the two thousand livres , and without having met with any accident .
it was thus athos found at home resources which he did not expect .
39 a vision
at four oclock the four friends were all assembled with athos .
their anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared , and each countenance only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet -- for behind all present happiness is concealed a fear for the future .
suddenly planchet entered , bringing two letters for dartagnan .
the one was a little billet , genteelly folded , with a pretty seal in green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a green branch .
the other was a large square epistle , resplendent with the terrible arms of his eminence the cardinal duke .
at the sight of the little letter the heart of dartagnan bounded , for he believed he recognized the handwriting , and although he had seen that writing but once , the memory of it remained at the bottom of his heart .
he therefore seized the little epistle , and opened it eagerly .
no signature .
" that s a snare , " said athos ; " do nt go , dartagnan . "
" and yet , " replied dartagnan , " i think i recognize the writing . "
" but suppose we all go , " said dartagnan ; " what the devil ! they wo nt devour us all four , four lackeys , horses , arms , and all ! "
" and besides , it will be a chance for displaying our new equipments , " said porthos .
" but if it is a woman who writes , " said aramis , " and that woman desires not to be seen , remember , you compromise her , dartagnan ; which is not the part of a gentleman . "
" we will remain in the background , " said porthos , " and he will advance alone . "
" yes ; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriage which goes at a gallop . "
they must be enemies . "
" he is right , " said porthos ; " battle . besides , we must try our own arms . "
" bah , let us enjoy that pleasure , " said aramis , with his mild and careless manner .
" as you please , " said athos .
" gentlemen , " said dartagnan , " it is half past four , and we have scarcely time to be on the road of chaillot by six . "
let us get ready , gentlemen . "
" but this second letter , " said athos , " you forget that ; it appears to me , however , that the seal denotes that it deserves to be opened . for my part , i declare , dartagnan , i think it of much more consequence than the little piece of waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your bosom . "
dartagnan blushed .
" well , " said he , " let us see , gentlemen , what are his eminence s commands , " and dartagnan unsealed the letter and read ,
" m. dartagnan , of the king s guards , company dessessart , is expected at the palais - cardinal this evening , at eight oclock .
" la houdiniere , captain of the guards "
" the devil ! " said athos ; " here s a rendezvous much more serious than the other . "
" i will go to the second after attending the first , " said dartagnan . " one is for seven oclock , and the other for eight ; there will be time for both . " " hum !
i would not go at all , " said aramis . " a gallant knight can not decline a rendezvous with a lady ; but a prudent gentleman may excuse himself from not waiting on his eminence , particularly when he has reason to believe he is not invited to make his compliments . "
" i am of aramis s opinion , " said porthos .
i neglected it , and on the morrow a serious misfortune happened to me -- constance disappeared .
" if you are determined , " said athos , " do so . "
" but the bastille ? " said aramis .
" bah ! you will get me out if they put me there , " said dartagnan .
it is a long time since we have had a skirmish with the guards of monsieur the cardinal ; monsieur de treville must think us dead . "
" admirable ! " replied the young men in chorus .
" well , " said porthos , " i will run to the hotel , and engage our comrades to hold themselves in readiness by eight oclock ; the rendezvous , the place du palais - cardinal . meantime , you see that the lackeys saddle the horses . "
" i have no horse , " said dartagnan ; " but that is of no consequence , i can take one of monsieur de treville s . "
" that is not worth while , " said aramis , " you can have one of mine . "
" one of yours ! how many have you , then ? " asked dartagnan .
" three , " replied aramis , smiling .
" certes , " cried athos , " you are the best - mounted poet of france or navarre . "
" therefore i only purchased two , " said aramis .
" the third , then , fell from the clouds , i suppose ? "
" no , the third was brought to me this very morning by a groom out of livery , who would not tell me in whose service he was , and who said he had received orders from his master . "
" or his mistress , " interrupted dartagnan .
" that makes no difference , " said aramis , coloring ; " and who affirmed , as i said , that he had received orders from his master or mistress to place the horse in my stable , without informing me whence it came . "
" it is only to poets that such things happen , " said athos , gravely .
" well , in that case , we can manage famously , " said dartagnan ; " which of the two horses will you ride -- that which you bought or the one that was given to you ? "
" that which was given to me , assuredly . you can not for a moment imagine , dartagnan , that i would commit such an offense toward-- "
" the unknown giver , " interrupted dartagnan .
" or the mysterious benefactress , " said athos .
" the one you bought will then become useless to you ? "
" nearly so . "
" and you selected it yourself ? "
" with the greatest care . the safety of the horseman , you know , depends almost always upon the goodness of his horse . "
" well , transfer it to me at the price it cost you ? "
" how much did it cost you ? "
" eight hundred livres . "
" here are forty double pistoles , my dear friend , " said dartagnan , taking the sum from his pocket ; " i know that is the coin in which you were paid for your poems . "
" you are rich , then ? " said aramis .
" rich ? richest , my dear fellow ! "
and dartagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket .
" send your saddle , then , to the hotel of the musketeers , and your horse can be brought back with ours . "
" very well ; but it is already five oclock , so make haste . "
a quarter of an hour afterward porthos appeared at the end of the rue ferou on a very handsome genet . mousqueton followed him upon an auvergne horse , small but very handsome .
porthos was resplendent with joy and pride .
at the same time , aramis made his appearance at the other end of the street upon a superb english charger . bazin followed him upon a roan , holding by the halter a vigorous mecklenburg horse ; this was dartagnan s mount .
the two musketeers met at the gate . athos and dartagnan watched their approach from the window .
" the devil ! " cried aramis , " you have a magnificent horse there , porthos . "
" yes , " replied porthos , " it is the one that ought to have been sent to me at first . a bad joke of the husband s substituted the other ; but the husband has been punished since , and i have obtained full satisfaction . "
the lackeys followed .
as porthos had foreseen , the cavalcade produced a good effect ; and if mme . coquenard had met porthos and seen what a superb appearance he made upon his handsome spanish genet , she would not have regretted the bleeding she had inflicted upon the strongbox of her husband .
near the louvre the four friends met with m. de treville , who was returning from st . germain ; he stopped them to offer his compliments upon their appointments , which in an instant drew round them a hundred gapers .
dartagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to m. de treville of the letter with the great red seal and the cardinal s arms . it is well understood that he did not breathe a word about the other .
m de treville approved of the resolution he had adopted , and assured him that if on the morrow he did not appear , he himself would undertake to find him , let him be where he might .
at this moment the clock of la samaritaine struck six ; the four friends pleaded an engagement , and took leave of m. de treville .
a short gallop brought them to the road of chaillot ; the day began to decline , carriages were passing and repassing . dartagnan , keeping at some distance from his friends , darted a scrutinizing glance into every carriage that appeared , but saw no face with which he was acquainted .
at length , after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as twilight was beginning to thicken , a carriage appeared , coming at a quick pace on the road of sevres . a presentiment instantly told dartagnan that this carriage contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous ; the young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so violently .
almost instantly a female head was put out at the window , with two fingers placed upon her mouth , either to enjoin silence or to send him a kiss . dartagnan uttered a slight cry of joy ; this woman , or rather this apparition -- for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision -- was mme . bonacieux .
by an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction given , dartagnan put his horse into a gallop , and in a few strides overtook the carriage ; but the window was hermetically closed , the vision had disappeared .
dartagnan then remembered the injunction : " if you value your own life or that of those who love you , remain motionless , and as if you had seen nothing . "
he stopped , therefore , trembling not for himself but for the poor woman who had evidently exposed herself to great danger by appointing this rendezvous .
the carriage pursued its way , still going at a great pace , till it dashed into paris , and disappeared .
dartagnan remained fixed to the spot , astounded and not knowing what to think .
if it was mme . bonacieux and if she was returning to paris , why this fugitive rendezvous , why this simple exchange of a glance , why this lost kiss ?
his three companions joined him .
all had plainly seen a woman s head appear at the window , but none of them , except athos , knew mme . bonacieux .
the opinion of athos was that it was indeed she ; but less preoccupied by that pretty face than dartagnan , he had fancied he saw a second head , a man s head , inside the carriage .
" if that be the case , " said dartagnan , " they are doubtless transporting her from one prison to another .
but what can they intend to do with the poor creature , and how shall i ever meet her again ? "
" friend , " said athos , gravely , " remember that it is the dead alone with whom we are not likely to meet again on this earth .
you know something of that , as well as i do , i think .
now , if your mistress is not dead , if it is she we have just seen , you will meet with her again some day or other .
and perhaps , my god ! " added he , with that misanthropic tone which was peculiar to him , " perhaps sooner than you wish . " half past seven had sounded .
dartagnan s friends reminded him that he had a visit to pay , but at the same time bade him observe that there was yet time to retract .
but dartagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious .
he had made up his mind that he would go to the palais - cardinal , and that he would learn what his eminence had to say to him .
nothing could turn him from his purpose .
they reached the rue st . honore , and in the place du palais - cardinal they found the twelve invited musketeers , walking about in expectation of their comrades .
there only they explained to them the matter in hand .
dartagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the king s musketeers , in which it was known he would one day take his place ; he was considered beforehand as a comrade .
it resulted from these antecedents that everyone entered heartily into the purpose for which they met ; besides , it would not be unlikely that they would have an opportunity of playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn , and for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always ready .
athos divided them into three groups , assumed the command of one , gave the second to aramis , and the third to porthos ; and then each group went and took their watch near an entrance .
dartagnan , on his part , entered boldly at the principal gate .
although he felt himself ably supported , the young man was not without a little uneasiness as he ascended the great staircase , step by step .
his conduct toward milady bore a strong resemblance to treachery , and he was very suspicious of the political relations which existed between that woman and the cardinal . still further , de wardes , whom he had treated so ill , was one of the tools of his eminence ; and dartagnan knew that while his eminence was terrible to his enemies , he was strongly attached to his friends .
" if de wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal , which is not to be doubted , and if he has recognized me , as is probable , i may consider myself almost as a condemned man , " said dartagnan , shaking his head .
" but why has he waited till now ? that s all plain enough .
milady has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which renders her so interesting , and this last offense has made the cup overflow . "
" fortunately , " added he , " my good friends are down yonder , and they will not allow me to be carried away without a struggle .
nevertheless , monsieur de treville s company of musketeers alone can not maintain a war against the cardinal , who disposes of the forces of all france , and before whom the queen is without power and the king without will . dartagnan , my friend , you are brave , you are prudent , you have excellent qualities ; but the women will ruin you ! "
he came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber .
he placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty , who led him into the waiting room and passed on into the interior of the palace .
in this waiting room were five or six of the cardinals guards , who recognized dartagnan , and knowing that it was he who had wounded jussac , they looked upon him with a smile of singular meaning .
this smile appeared to dartagnan to be of bad augury . only , as our gascon was not easily intimidated -- or rather , thanks to a great pride natural to the men of his country , he did not allow one easily to see what was passing in his mind when that which was passing at all resembled fear -- he placed himself haughtily in front of messieurs the guards , and waited with his hand on his hip , in an attitude by no means deficient in majesty .
the usher returned and made a sign to dartagnan to follow him .
it appeared to the young man that the guards , on seeing him depart , chuckled among themselves .
he traversed a corridor , crossed a grand saloon , entered a library , and found himself in the presence of a man seated at a desk and writing .
the usher introduced him , and retired without speaking a word .
dartagnan recognized the cardinal .
40 a terrible vision
the cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript , his cheek upon his hand , and looked intently at the young man for a moment .
no one had a more searching eye than the cardinal de richelieu , and dartagnan felt this glance run through his veins like a fever .
he however kept a good countenance , holding his hat in his hand and awaiting the good pleasure of his eminence , without too much assurance , but also without too much humility .
" monsieur , " said the cardinal , " are you a dartagnan from bearn ? "
" yes , monseigneur , " replied the young man .
" there are several branches of the dartagnans at tarbes and in its environs , " said the cardinal ; " to which do you belong ? "
" i am the son of him who served in the religious wars under the great king henry , the father of his gracious majesty . "
" that is well .
it is you who set out seven or eight months ago from your country to seek your fortune in the capital ? "
" yes , monseigneur . "
i do nt very well know what , but still something . "
" monseigneur , " said dartagnan , " this was what happened to me-- " " never mind , never mind ! " resumed the cardinal , with a smile which indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it .
" the letter was lost , " replied his eminence ; " yes , i know that . but monsieur de treville is a skilled physiognomist , who knows men at first sight ; and he placed you in the company of his brother - in - law , monsieur dessessart , leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter the musketeers . "
" monseigneur is correctly informed , " said dartagnan .
" since that time many things have happened to you . you were walking one day behind the chartreux , when it would have been better if you had been elsewhere . then you took with your friends a journey to the waters of forges ; they stopped on the road , but you continued yours .
that is all very simple : you had business in england . "
" monseigneur , " said dartagnan , quite confused , " i went-- "
" hunting at windsor , or elsewhere -- that concerns nobody .
i know , because it is my office to know everything .
on your return you were received by an august personage , and i perceive with pleasure that you preserve the souvenir she gave you . "
dartagnan placed his hand upon the queen s diamond , which he wore , and quickly turned the stone inward ; but it was too late .
" the day after that , you received a visit from cavois , " resumed the cardinal . " he went to desire you to come to the palace . you have not returned that visit , and you were wrong . "
" monseigneur , i feared i had incurred disgrace with your eminence . "
" how could that be , monsieur ? could you incur my displeasure by having followed the orders of your superiors with more intelligence and courage than another would have done ?
it is the people who do not obey that i punish , and not those who , like you , obey -- but too well .
as a proof , remember the date of the day on which i had you bidden to come to me , and seek in your memory for what happened to you that very night . "
" in short , " continued the cardinal , " as i have heard nothing of you for some time past , i wished to know what you were doing .
besides , you owe me some thanks . you must yourself have remarked how much you have been considered in all the circumstances . "
dartagnan bowed with respect .
" that , " continued the cardinal , " arose not only from a feeling of natural equity , but likewise from a plan i have marked out with respect to you . "
dartagnan became more and more astonished .
" i wished to explain this plan to you on the day you received my first invitation ; but you did not come .
fortunately , nothing is lost by this delay , and you are now about to hear it .
sit down there , before me , dartagnan ; you are gentleman enough not to listen standing . "
and the cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young man , who was so astonished at what was passing that he awaited a second sign from his interlocutor before he obeyed .
" you are brave , monsieur dartagnan , " continued his eminence ; " you are prudent , which is still better .
" alas , monseigneur ! " replied the young man , " very easily , no doubt , for they are strong and well supported , while i am alone . "
" yes , that s true ; but alone as you are , you have done much already , and will do still more , i do nt doubt .
yet you have need , i believe , to be guided in the adventurous career you have undertaken ; for , if i mistake not , you came to paris with the ambitious idea of making your fortune . "
" i am at the age of extravagant hopes , monseigneur , " said dartagnan .
" there are no extravagant hopes but for fools , monsieur , and you are a man of understanding .
now , what would you say to an ensign s commission in my guards , and a company after the campaign ? "
" ah , monseigneur . "
" you accept it , do you not ? "
" monseigneur , " replied dartagnan , with an embarrassed air .
" how ? you refuse ? " cried the cardinal , with astonishment .
" i am in his majesty s guards , monseigneur , and i have no reason to be dissatisfied . "
" monseigneur , your eminence has ill understood my words . "
" you want a pretext , do you not ?
i comprehend .
dartagnan colored .
come ; reflect , and decide . "
" your goodness confounds me , monseigneur , " replied dartagnan , " and i am conscious of a greatness of soul in your eminence that makes me mean as an earthworm ; but since monseigneur permits me to speak freely-- "
dartagnan paused .
" yes ; speak . "
" then , i will presume to say that all my friends are in the king s musketeers and guards , and that by an inconceivable fatality my enemies are in the service of your eminence ; i should , therefore , be ill received here and ill regarded there if i accepted what monseigneur offers me . "
" monseigneur , your eminence is a hundred times too kind to me ; and on the contrary , i think i have not proved myself worthy of your goodness .
the siege of la rochelle is about to be resumed , monseigneur . i shall serve under the eye of your eminence , and if i have the good fortune to conduct myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your attention , then i shall at least leave behind me some brilliant action to justify the protection with which you honor me .
everything is best in its time , monseigneur . hereafter , perhaps , i shall have the right of giving myself ; at present i shall appear to sell myself . "
" that is to say , you refuse to serve me , monsieur , " said the cardinal , with a tone of vexation , through which , however , might be seen a sort of esteem ; " remain free , then , and guard your hatreds and your sympathies . "
" monseigneur-- "
" i will try to do so , monseigneur , " replied the gascon , with a noble confidence .
" remember at a later period and at a certain moment , if any mischance should happen to you , " said richelieu , significantly , " that it was i who came to seek you , and that i did all in my power to prevent this misfortune befalling you . "
" i shall entertain , whatever may happen , " said dartagnan , placing his hand upon his breast and bowing , " an eternal gratitude toward your eminence for that which you now do for me . "
this last expression of richelieu s conveyed a terrible doubt ; it alarmed dartagnan more than a menace would have done , for it was a warning .
the cardinal , then , was seeking to preserve him from some misfortune which threatened him .
he opened his mouth to reply , but with a haughty gesture the cardinal dismissed him .
dartagnan went out , but at the door his heart almost failed him , and he felt inclined to return .
then the noble and severe countenance of athos crossed his mind ; if he made the compact with the cardinal which he required , athos would no more give him his hand -- athos would renounce him .
it was this fear that restrained him , so powerful is the influence of a truly great character on all that surrounds it .
dartagnan descended by the staircase at which he had entered , and found athos and the four musketeers waiting his appearance , and beginning to grow uneasy .
with a word , dartagnan reassured them ; and planchet ran to inform the other sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer , as his master had come out safe from the palais - cardinal .
returned home with athos , aramis and porthos inquired eagerly the cause of the strange interview ; but dartagnan confined himself to telling them that m. de richelieu had sent for him to propose to him to enter into his guards with the rank of ensign , and that he had refused .
" and you were right , " cried aramis and porthos , with one voice .
athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing .
but when they were alone he said , " you have done that which you ought to have done , dartagnan ; but perhaps you have been wrong . "
dartagnan sighed deeply , for this voice responded to a secret voice of his soul , which told him that great misfortunes awaited him .
the whole of the next day was spent in preparations for departure . dartagnan went to take leave of m. de treville .
at that time it was believed that the separation of the musketeers and the guards would be but momentary , the king holding his parliament that very day and proposing to set out the day after .
m. de treville contented himself with asking dartagnan if he could do anything for him , but dartagnan answered that he was supplied with all he wanted .
that night brought together all those comrades of the guards of m. dessessart and the company of musketeers of m. de treville who had been accustomed to associate together .
they were parting to meet again when it pleased god , and if it pleased god .
at the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends separated ; the musketeers hastening to the hotel of m. de treville , the guards to that of m. dessessart .
each of the captains then led his company to the louvre , where the king held his review .
the king was dull and appeared ill , which detracted a little from his usual lofty bearing .
in fact , the evening before , a fever had seized him in the midst of the parliament , while he was holding his bed of justice .
he had , not the less , decided upon setting out that same evening ; and in spite of the remonstrances that had been offered to him , he persisted in having the review , hoping by setting it at defiance to conquer the disease which began to lay hold upon him .
the review over , the guards set forward alone on their march , the musketeers waiting for the king , which allowed porthos time to go and take a turn in his superb equipment in the rue aux ours .
the procurator s wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on his fine horse .
she loved porthos too dearly to allow him to part thus ; she made him a sign to dismount and come to her .
porthos was magnificent ; his spurs jingled , his cuirass glittered , his sword knocked proudly against his ample limbs .
this time the clerks evinced no inclination to laugh , such a real ear clipper did porthos appear .
the musketeer was introduced to m. coquenard , whose little gray eyes sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all blazing new .
porthos paid his compliments to m. coquenard and bade him farewell . m. coquenard wished him all sorts of prosperities .
as to mme . coquenard , she could not restrain her tears ; but no evil impressions were taken from her grief as she was known to be very much attached to her relatives , about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with her husband .
but the real adieux were made in mme . coquenard s chamber ; they were heartrending .
porthos received all these attentions like a man accustomed to such demonstrations , only on turning the corner of the street he lifted his hat gracefully , and waved it to her as a sign of adieu .
on his part aramis wrote a long letter .
to whom ?
nobody knew .
kitty , who was to set out that evening for tours , was waiting in the next chamber .
athos sipped the last bottle of his spanish wine .
in the meantime dartagnan was defiling with his company .
to a look of interrogation which they made , milady replied by a sign that it was he .
then , certain that there could be no mistake in the execution of her orders , she started her horse and disappeared .
the two men followed the company , and on leaving the faubourg st . antoine , mounted two horses properly equipped , which a servant without livery had waiting for them .
41 the seige of la rochelle
the siege of la rochelle was one of the great political events of the reign of louis xiii , and one of the great military enterprises of the cardinal .
the political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were extensive .
let us unfold them first , and then pass on to the private plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his eminence than the others .
of the important cities given up by henry iv to the huguenots as places of safety , there only remained la rochelle .
it became necessary , therefore , to destroy this last bulwark of calvinism -- a dangerous leaven with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly mingling .
spaniards , englishmen , and italian malcontents , adventurers of all nations , and soldiers of fortune of every sect , flocked at the first summons under the standard of the protestants , and organized themselves like a vast association , whose branches diverged freely over all parts of europe .
la rochelle , which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the other calvinist cities , was , then , the focus of dissensions and ambition .
moreover , its port was the last in the kingdom of france open to the english , and by closing it against england , our eternal enemy , the cardinal completed the work of joan of arc and the duc de guise .
we have hinted that by the side of these views of the leveling and simplifying minister , which belong to history , the chronicler is forced to recognize the lesser motives of the amorous man and jealous rival .
richelieu , as everyone knows , had loved the queen . was this love a simple political affair , or was it naturally one of those profound passions which anne of austria inspired in those who approached her ?
it was , then , richelieu s object , not only to get rid of an enemy of france , but to avenge himself on a rival ; but this vengeance must be grand and striking and worthy in every way of a man who held in his hand , as his weapon for combat , the forces of a kingdom .
richelieu knew that in combating england he combated buckingham ; that in triumphing over england he triumphed over buckingham -- in short , that in humiliating england in the eyes of europe he humiliated buckingham in the eyes of the queen .
on his side buckingham , in pretending to maintain the honor of england , was moved by interests exactly like those of the cardinal . buckingham also was pursuing a private vengeance . buckingham could not under any pretense be admitted into france as an ambassador ; he wished to enter it as a conqueror .
it resulted from this that the real stake in this game , which two most powerful kingdoms played for the good pleasure of two amorous men , was simply a kind look from anne of austria .
the first advantage had been gained by buckingham . arriving unexpectedly in sight of the isle of re with ninety vessels and nearly twenty thousand men , he had surprised the comte de toiras , who commanded for the king in the isle , and he had , after a bloody conflict , effected his landing .
allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished the baron de chantal ; that the baron de chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen months old , and that this little girl was afterward mme . de sevigne .
the comte de toiras retired into the citadel st . martin with his garrison , and threw a hundred men into a little fort called the fort of la pree .
this event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal ; and till the king and he could take the command of the siege of la rochelle , which was determined , he had sent monsieur to direct the first operations , and had ordered all the troops he could dispose of to march toward the theater of war .
it was of this detachment , sent as a vanguard , that our friend dartagnan formed a part .
he , however , arrived without accident in the camp established before la rochelle , of the tenth of the month of september of the year 1627 .
everything was in the same state . the duke of buckingham and his english , masters of the isle of re , continued to besiege , but without success , the citadel st . martin and the fort of la pree ; and hostilities with la rochelle had commenced , two or three days before , about a fort which the duc dangouleme had caused to be constructed near the city .
the guards , under the command of m. dessessart , took up their quarters at the minimes ; but , as we know , dartagnan , possessed with ambition to enter the musketeers , had formed but few friendships among his comrades , and he felt himself isolated and given up to his own reflections .
his reflections were not very cheerful . from the time of his arrival in paris , he had been mixed up with public affairs ; but his own private affairs had made no great progress , either in love or fortune .
as to love , the only woman he could have loved was mme . bonacieux ; and mme . bonacieux had disappeared , without his being able to discover what had become of her .
then he had made himself another enemy , less to be feared , he thought ; but nevertheless , he instinctively felt , not to be despised . this enemy was milady .
in exchange for all this , he had acquired the protection and good will of the queen ; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an additional cause of persecution , and her protection , as it was known , protected badly -- as witness chalais and mme . bonacieux .
what he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond , worth five or six thousand livres , which he wore on his finger ; and even this diamond -- supposing that dartagnan , in his projects of ambition , wished to keep it , to make it someday a pledge for the gratitude of the queen -- had not in the meanwhile , since he could not part with it , more value than the gravel he trod under his feet .
dartagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding . he comprehended that the musket had not come there of itself , and that he who bore it had not concealed himself behind a hedge with any friendly intentions .
this was evidently an ambuscade .
dartagnan sprang up with a bound , and at the same instant the ball from the other musket tore up the gravel on the very spot on the road where he had thrown himself with his face to the ground .
dartagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a ridiculous death in order that it may be said of them that they did not retreat a single step . besides , courage was out of the question here ; dartagnan had fallen into an ambush .
" if there is a third shot , " said he to himself , " i am a lost man . "
as he , however , had no other hat , he picked up this as he ran , and arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of breath . he sat down without saying a word to anybody , and began to reflect .
this event might have three causes :
the first and the most natural was that it might be an ambuscade of the rochellais , who might not be sorry to kill one of his majesty s guards , because it would be an enemy the less , and this enemy might have a well - furnished purse in his pocket .
dartagnan took his hat , examined the hole made by the ball , and shook his head .
the ball was not a musket ball -- it was an arquebus ball . the accuracy of the aim had first given him the idea that a special weapon had been employed . this could not , then , be a military ambuscade , as the ball was not of the regular caliber .
this might be a kind remembrance of monsieur the cardinal .
it may be observed that at the very moment when , thanks to the ray of the sun , he perceived the gun barrel , he was thinking with astonishment on the forbearance of his eminence with respect to him .
but dartagnan again shook his head .
for people toward whom he had but to put forth his hand , his eminence had rarely recourse to such means .
it might be a vengeance of milady ; that was most probable .
dartagnan passed a very bad night .
three or four times he started up , imagining that a man was approaching his bed for the purpose of stabbing him .
nevertheless , day dawned without darkness having brought any accident .
but dartagnan well suspected that that which was deferred was not relinquished .
dartagnan remained all day in his quarters , assigning as a reason to himself that the weather was bad .
at nine oclock the next morning , the drums beat to arms .
the duc dorleans visited the posts .
the guards were under arms , and dartagnan took his place in the midst of his comrades .
monsieur passed along the front of the line ; then all the superior officers approached him to pay their compliments , m. dessessart , captain of the guards , as well as the others .
" thanks , my captain ! " replied dartagnan , who wished for nothing better than an opportunity to distinguish himself under the eye of the lieutenant general .
the matter was to ascertain , by reconnoitering , how the enemy guarded this bastion .
" as to the man to be depended upon , i have him under my hand , monsieur , " said m. dessessart , pointing to dartagnan ; " and as to the four or five volunteers , monsieur has but to make his intentions known , and the men will not be wanting . "
" four men of good will who will risk being killed with me ! " said dartagnan , raising his sword .
two of his comrades of the guards immediately sprang forward , and two other soldiers having joined them , the number was deemed sufficient . dartagnan declined all others , being unwilling to take the first chance from those who had the priority .
it was not known whether , after the taking of the bastion , the rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it ; the object then was to examine the place near enough to verify the reports .
dartagnan set out with his four companions , and followed the trench ; the two guards marched abreast with him , and the two soldiers followed behind .
they arrived thus , screened by the lining of the trench , till they came within a hundred paces of the bastion .
there , on turning round , dartagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared .
he thought that , beginning to be afraid , they had stayed behind , and he continued to advance .
at the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves within about sixty paces of the bastion .
they saw no one , and the bastion seemed abandoned .
the three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating whether they should proceed any further , when all at once a circle of smoke enveloped the giant of stone , and a dozen balls came whistling around dartagnan and his companions .
they knew all they wished to know ; the bastion was guarded .
a longer stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence . dartagnan and his two companions turned their backs , and commenced a retreat which resembled a flight .
on arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve them as a rampart , one of the guardsmen fell . a ball had passed through his breast .
the other , who was safe and sound , continued his way toward the camp .
the young man turned quickly round , for this attack could not have come from the bastion , which was hidden by the angle of the trench .
he quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work within thirty paces of him ; they were the heads of the two soldiers .
dartagnan had not been deceived ; these two men had only followed for the purpose of assassinating him , hoping that the young man s death would be placed to the account of the enemy .
as he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime , they came up to him with the purpose of making sure . fortunately , deceived by dartagnan s trick , they neglected to reload their guns .
when they were within ten paces of him , dartagnan , who in falling had taken care not to let go his sword , sprang up close to them .
the assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp without having killed their man , they should be accused by him ; therefore their first idea was to join the enemy .
one of them took his gun by the barrel , and used it as he would a club . he aimed a terrible blow at dartagnan , who avoided it by springing to one side ; but by this movement he left a passage free to the bandit , who darted off toward the bastion .
as the rochellais who guarded the bastion were ignorant of the intentions of the man they saw coming toward them , they fired upon him , and he fell , struck by a ball which broke his shoulder .
meantime dartagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier , attacking him with his sword . the conflict was not long ; the wretch had nothing to defend himself with but his discharged arquebus . the sword of the guardsman slipped along the barrel of the now - useless weapon , and passed through the thigh of the assassin , who fell .
dartagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his throat .
" oh , do not kill me ! " cried the bandit . " pardon , pardon , my officer , and i will tell you all . "
" is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your life for it ? " asked the young man , withholding his arm .
" yes ; if you think existence worth anything to a man of twenty , as you are , and who may hope for everything , being handsome and brave , as you are . "
" wretch , " cried dartagnan , " speak quickly ! who employed you to assassinate me ? "
" a woman whom i do nt know , but who is called milady . "
" but if you do nt know this woman , how do you know her name ? "
" he proposed to me to undertake it with him , and i agreed . "
" and how much did she give you for this fine enterprise ? " " a hundred louis . "
" well , come ! " said the young man , laughing , " she thinks i am worth something .
a hundred louis ?
" what is that ? " said the soldier , uneasy at perceiving that all was not over .
" that you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has in his pocket . "
" but , " cried the bandit , " that is only another way of killing me . how can i go and fetch that letter under the fire of the bastion ? "
" you must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it , or i swear you shall die by my hand . "
" pardon , monsieur ; pity ! in the name of that young lady you love , and whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not ! " cried the bandit , throwing himself upon his knees and leaning upon his hand -- for he began to lose his strength with his blood .
" and how do you know there is a young woman whom i love , and that i believed that woman dead ? " asked dartagnan .
" by that letter which my comrade has in his pocket . "
" you see , then , " said dartagnan , " that i must have that letter . so no more delay , no more hesitation ; or else whatever may be my repugnance to soiling my sword a second time with the blood of a wretch like you , i swear by my faith as an honest man-- " and at these words dartagnan made so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up .
" stop , stop ! " cried he , regaining strength by force of terror . " i will go -- i will go ! "
dartagnan took the soldier s arquebus , made him go on before him , and urged him toward his companion by pricking him behind with his sword .
it was a frightful thing to see this wretch , leaving a long track of blood on the ground he passed over , pale with approaching death , trying to drag himself along without being seen to the body of his accomplice , which lay twenty paces from him .
there were two means of gaining his object -- to search him on the spot , or to carry him away , making a buckler of his body , and search him in the trench .
dartagnan preferred the second means , and lifted the assassin onto his shoulders at the moment the enemy fired .
a slight shock , the dull noise of three balls which penetrated the flesh , a last cry , a convulsion of agony , proved to dartagnan that the would - be assassin had saved his life .
dartagnan regained the trench , and threw the corpse beside the wounded man , who was as pale as death .
then he began to search . a leather pocketbook , a purse , in which was evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had received , with a dice box and dice , completed the possessions of the dead man .
he left the box and dice where they fell , threw the purse to the wounded man , and eagerly opened the pocketbook .
among some unimportant papers he found the following letter , that which he had sought at the risk of his life :
" since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in safety in the convent , which you should never have allowed her to reach , try , at least , not to miss the man . if you do , you know that my hand stretches far , and that you shall pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have from me . "
no signature .
nevertheless it was plain the letter came from milady .
he consequently kept it as a piece of evidence , and being in safety behind the angle of the trench , he began to interrogate the wounded man .
he confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade -- the same who was killed -- to carry off a young woman who was to leave paris by the barriere de la villette ; but having stopped to drink at a cabaret , they had missed the carriage by ten minutes .
" but what were you to do with that woman ? " asked dartagnan , with anguish .
" we were to have conveyed her to a hotel in the place royale , " said the wounded man .
" yes , yes ! " murmured dartagnan ; " that s the place -- milady s own residence ! "
then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible thirst for vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him , as well as all who loved him , and how well she must be acquainted with the affairs of the court , since she had discovered all .
there could be no doubt she owed this information to the cardinal .
but amid all this he perceived , with a feeling of real joy , that the queen must have discovered the prison in which poor mme . bonacieux was explaining her devotion , and that she had freed her from that prison ; and the letter he had received from the young woman , and her passage along the road of chaillot like an apparition , were now explained .
then also , as athos had predicted , it became possible to find mme . bonacieux , and a convent was not impregnable .
this idea completely restored clemency to his heart .
he turned toward the wounded man , who had watched with intense anxiety all the various expressions of his countenance , and holding out his arm to him , said , " come , i will not abandon you thus .
lean upon me , and let us return to the camp . "
" yes , " said the man , who could scarcely believe in such magnanimity , " but is it not to have me hanged ? "
" you have my word , " said he ; " for the second time i give you your life . "
the wounded man sank upon his knees , to again kiss the feet of his preserver ; but dartagnan , who had no longer a motive for staying so near the enemy , abridged the testimonials of his gratitude .
the guardsman who had returned at the first discharge announced the death of his four companions .
they were therefore much astonished and delighted in the regiment when they saw the young man come back safe and sound .
dartagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a sortie which he improvised .
he described the death of the other soldier , and the perils they had encountered .
this recital was for him the occasion of veritable triumph .
the whole army talked of this expedition for a day , and monsieur paid him his compliments upon it .
besides this , as every great action bears its recompense with it , the brave exploit of dartagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility he had lost .
in fact , dartagnan believed that he might be tranquil , as one of his two enemies was killed and the other devoted to his interests .
this tranquillity proved one thing -- that dartagnan did not yet know milady .
42 the anjou wine
after the most disheartening news of the king s health , a report of his convalescence began to prevail in the camp ; and as he was very anxious to be in person at the siege , it was said that as soon as he could mount a horse he would set forward .
meantime , monsieur , who knew that from one day to the other he might expect to be removed from his command by the duc dangouleme , by bassompierre , or by schomberg , who were all eager for his post , did but little , lost his days in wavering , and did not dare to attempt any great enterprise to drive the english from the isle of re , where they still besieged the citadel st . martin and the fort of la pree , as on their side the french were besieging la rochelle .
dartagnan , as we have said , had become more tranquil , as always happens after a past danger , particularly when the danger seems to have vanished . he only felt one uneasiness , and that was at not hearing any tidings from his friends .
but one morning at the commencement of the month of november everything was explained to him by this letter , dated from villeroy :
m dartagnan ,
i have done this , and am , monsieur , with great respect ,
your very humble and obedient servant ,
godeau , purveyor of the musketeers
" that s all well ! " cried dartagnan .
" they think of me in their pleasures , as i thought of them in my troubles . well , i will certainly drink to their health with all my heart , but i will not drink alone . "
and dartagnan went among those guardsmen with whom he had formed greater intimacy than with the others , to invite them to enjoy with him this present of delicious anjou wine which had been sent him from villeroy .
one of the two guardsmen was engaged that evening , and another the next , so the meeting was fixed for the day after that .
planchet , very proud of being raised to the dignity of landlord , thought he would make all ready , like an intelligent man ; and with this view called in the assistance of the lackey of one of his master s guests , named fourreau , and the false soldier who had tried to kill dartagnan and who , belonging to no corps , had entered into the service of dartagnan , or rather of planchet , after dartagnan had saved his life .
the hour of the banquet being come , the two guards arrived , took their places , and the dishes were arranged on the table .
planchet waited , towel on arm ; fourreau uncorked the bottles ; and brisemont , which was the name of the convalescent , poured the wine , which was a little shaken by its journey , carefully into decanters .
of this wine , the first bottle being a little thick at the bottom , brisemont poured the lees into a glass , and dartagnan desired him to drink it , for the poor devil had not yet recovered his strength .
the guests having eaten the soup , were about to lift the first glass of wine to their lips , when all at once the cannon sounded from fort louis and fort neuf . the guardsmen , imagining this to be caused by some unexpected attack , either of the besieged or the english , sprang to their swords . dartagnan , not less forward than they , did likewise , and all ran out , in order to repair to their posts .
but scarcely were they out of the room before they were made aware of the cause of this noise . cries of " live the king !
live the cardinal ! " resounded on every side , and the drums were beaten in all directions .
in short , the king , impatient , as has been said , had come by forced marches , and had that moment arrived with all his household and a reinforcement of ten thousand troops . his musketeers proceeded and followed him .
dartagnan , placed in line with his company , saluted with an expressive gesture his three friends , whose eyes soon discovered him , and m. de treville , who detected him at once .
the ceremony of reception over , the four friends were soon in one another s arms .
" pardieu ! " cried dartagnan , " you could not have arrived in better time ; the dinner can not have had time to get cold ! can it , gentlemen ? " added the young man , turning to the two guards , whom he introduced to his friends .
" ah , ah ! " said porthos , " it appears we are feasting ! "
" i hope , " said aramis , " there are no women at your dinner . "
" is there any drinkable wine in your tavern ? " asked athos .
" well , pardieu ! there is yours , my dear friend , " replied dartagnan .
" our wine ! " said athos , astonished .
" yes , that you sent me . "
" we sent you wine ? "
" you know very well -- the wine from the hills of anjou . "
" yes , i know what brand you are talking about . "
" the wine you prefer . "
" well , in the absence of champagne and chambertin , you must content yourselves with that . "
" and so , connoisseurs in wine as we are , we have sent you some anjou wine ? " said porthos .
" not exactly , it is the wine that was sent by your order . "
" on our account ? " said the three musketeers .
" did you send this wine , aramis ? " said athos .
" no ; and you , porthos ? "
" no ; and you , athos ? "
" no ! "
" if it was not you , it was your purveyor , " said dartagnan .
" our purveyor ! "
" yes , your purveyor , godeau -- the purveyor of the musketeers . "
" my faith ! never mind where it comes from , " said porthos , " let us taste it , and if it is good , let us drink it . "
" no , " said athos ; " do nt let us drink wine which comes from an unknown source . "
" you are right , athos , " said dartagnan .
" did none of you charge your purveyor , godeau , to send me some wine ? "
" no ! and yet you say he has sent you some as from us ? "
" this is not his writing ! " said athos .
" i am acquainted with it ; before we left villeroy i settled the accounts of the regiment . "
" a false letter altogether , " said porthos , " we have not been disciplined . "
" dartagnan , " said aramis , in a reproachful tone , " how could you believe that we had made a disturbance ? "
dartagnan grew pale , and a convulsive trembling shook all his limbs .
" thou alarmest me ! " said athos , who never used thee and thou but upon very particular occasions , " what has happened ? "
" look you , my friends ! " cried dartagnan , " a horrible suspicion crosses my mind ! can this be another vengeance of that woman ? "
it was now athos who turned pale .
dartagnan rushed toward the refreshment room , the three musketeers and the two guards following him .
the first object that met the eyes of dartagnan on entering the room was brisemont , stretched upon the ground and rolling in horrible convulsions .
planchet and fourreau , as pale as death , were trying to give him succor ; but it was plain that all assistance was useless -- all the features of the dying man were distorted with agony .
you pretend to pardon me , and you poison me ! " " i ! " cried dartagnan . " i , wretch ?
" do not think so , brisemont , " said dartagnan ; " do not think so . i swear to you , i protest-- "
" oh , but god is above !
god will punish you !
my god , grant that he may one day suffer what i suffer ! "
" upon the gospel , " said dartagnan , throwing himself down by the dying man , " i swear to you that the wine was poisoned and that i was going to drink of it as you did . "
" i do not believe you , " cried the soldier , and he expired amid horrible tortures .
" frightful ! frightful ! " murmured athos , while porthos broke the bottles and aramis gave orders , a little too late , that a confessor should be sent for .
" oh , my friends , " said dartagnan , " you come once more to save my life , not only mine but that of these gentlemen .
gentlemen , " continued he , addressing the guardsmen , " i request you will be silent with regard to this adventure . great personages may have had a hand in what you have seen , and if talked about , the evil would only recoil upon us . "
" ah , monsieur ! " stammered planchet , more dead than alive , " ah , monsieur , what an escape i have had ! "
" how , sirrah ! you were going to drink my wine ? "
" to the health of the king , monsieur ; i was going to drink a small glass of it if fourreau had not told me i was called . "
" alas ! " said fourreau , whose teeth chattered with terror , " i wanted to get him out of the way that i might drink myself . "
" gentlemen , " said dartagnan , addressing the guardsmen , " you may easily comprehend that such a feast can only be very dull after what has taken place ; so accept my excuses , and put off the party till another day , i beg of you . "
the two guardsmen courteously accepted dartagnan s excuses , and perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone , retired .
when the young guardsman and the three musketeers were without witnesses , they looked at one another with an air which plainly expressed that each of them perceived the gravity of their situation .
" planchet , " said dartagnan , " i commit the corpse of this poor devil to your care .
let him be interred in holy ground .
he committed a crime , it is true ; but he repented of it . "
and the four friends quit the room , leaving to planchet and fourreau the duty of paying mortuary honors to brisemont .
the host gave them another chamber , and served them with fresh eggs and some water , which athos went himself to draw at the fountain .
in a few words , porthos and aramis were posted as to the situation .
" well , " said dartagnan to athos , " you see , my dear friend , that this is war to the death . "
athos shook his head .
" yes , yes , " replied he , " i perceive that plainly ; but do you really believe it is she ? "
" i am sure of it . "
" nevertheless , i confess i still doubt . "
" but the fleur - de - lis on her shoulder ? "
" she is some englishwoman who has committed a crime in france , and has been branded in consequence . "
" athos , she is your wife , i tell you , " repeated dartagnan ; " only reflect how much the two descriptions resemble each other . "
" yes ; but i should think the other must be dead , i hanged her so effectually . "
it was dartagnan who now shook his head in his turn .
" but in either case , what is to be done ? " said the young man .
" the fact is , one can not remain thus , with a sword hanging eternally over his head , " said athos . " we must extricate ourselves from this position . "
" but how ? " " listen !
" i like the means well enough , " said dartagnan , " but where and how to meet with her ? "
the more we have ventured the more we gain , when we know how to wait . "
" bah ! " said athos . " god has preserved us hitherto , god will preserve us still . "
" yes , we . besides , we are men ; and everything considered , it is our lot to risk our lives ; but she , " asked he , in an undertone .
" what she ? " asked athos .
" madame bonacieux ! ah , that s true ! " said athos . " my poor friend , i had forgotten you were in love . "
" well , but , " said aramis , " have you not learned by the letter you found on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent ?
one may be very comfortable in a convent ; and as soon as the siege of la rochelle is terminated , i promise you on my part-- "
yes , my dear aramis , we all know that your views have a religious tendency . "
" well , " said porthos , " it appears to me that the means are very simple . "
" what ? " asked dartagnan .
" you say she is in a convent ? " replied porthos .
" yes . "
" very well . as soon as the siege is over , we ll carry her off from that convent . "
" but we must first learn what convent she is in . "
" that s true , " said porthos .
" but i think i have it , " said athos . " do nt you say , dear dartagnan , that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her ? "
" i believe so , at least . "
" in that case porthos will assist us . "
" and how so , if you please ? "
" why , by your marchioness , your duchess , your princess . she must have a long arm . "
" hush ! " said porthos , placing a finger on his lips . " i believe her to be a cardinalist ; she must know nothing of the matter . "
" then , " said aramis , " i take upon myself to obtain intelligence of her . "
" you , aramis ? " cried the three friends . " you ! and how ? "
" by the queen s almoner , to whom i am very intimately allied , " said aramis , coloring .
and on this assurance , the four friends , who had finished their modest repast , separated , with the promise of meeting again that evening . dartagnan returned to less important affairs , and the three musketeers repaired to the king s quarters , where they had to prepare their lodging .
43 the sign of the red dovecot
meanwhile the king , who , with more reason than the cardinal , showed his hatred for buckingham , although scarcely arrived was in such a haste to meet the enemy that he commanded every disposition to be made to drive the english from the isle of re , and afterward to press the siege of la rochelle ; but notwithstanding his earnest wish , he was delayed by the dissensions which broke out between mm bassompierre and schomberg , against the duc dangouleme .
mm bassompierre and schomberg were marshals of france , and claimed their right of commanding the army under the orders of the king ; but the cardinal , who feared that bassompierre , a huguenot at heart , might press but feebly the english and rochellais , his brothers in religion , supported the duc dangouleme , whom the king , at his instigation , had named lieutenant general .
the quarters of monsieur were at dompierre ; the quarters of the king were sometimes at estree , sometimes at jarrie ; the cardinal s quarters were upon the downs , at the bridge of la pierre , in a simple house without any entrenchment .
so that monsieur watched bassompierre ; the king , the duc dangouleme ; and the cardinal , m. de schomberg .
as soon as this organization was established , they set about driving the english from the isle .
the english , repulsed foot by foot , beaten in all encounters , and defeated in the passage of the isle of loie , were obliged to re - embark , leaving on the field of battle two thousand men , among whom were five colonels , three lieutenant colonels , two hundred and fifty captains , twenty gentlemen of rank , four pieces of cannon , and sixty flags , which were taken to paris by claude de st . simon , and suspended with great pomp in the arches of notre dame .
te deums were chanted in camp , and afterward throughout france .
the cardinal was left free to carry on the siege , without having , at least at the present , anything to fear on the part of the english .
but it must be acknowledged , this response was but momentary .
an envoy of the duke of buckingham , named montague , was taken , and proof was obtained of a league between the german empire , spain , england , and lorraine .
this league was directed against france .
it was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell , for one is not a despotic minister without responsibility . all , therefore , of the vast resources of his genius were at work night and day , engaged in listening to the least report heard in any of the great kingdoms of europe .
the cardinal was acquainted with the activity , and more particularly the hatred , of buckingham . if the league which threatened france triumphed , all his influence would be lost . spanish policy and austrian policy would have their representatives in the cabinet of the louvre , where they had as yet but partisans ; and he , richelieu -- the french minister , the national minister -- would be ruined .
the king , even while obeying him like a child , hated him as a child hates his master , and would abandon him to the personal vengeance of monsieur and the queen . he would then be lost , and france , perhaps , with him .
all this must be prepared against .
courtiers , becoming every instant more numerous , succeeded one another , day and night , in the little house of the bridge of la pierre , in which the cardinal had established his residence .
there were monks who wore the frock with such an ill grace that it was easy to perceive they belonged to the church militant ; women a little inconvenienced by their costume as pages and whose large trousers could not entirely conceal their rounded forms ; and peasants with blackened hands but with fine limbs , savoring of the man of quality a league off .
there were also less agreeable visits -- for two or three times reports were spread that the cardinal had nearly been assassinated .
it is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it was he himself who set these bungling assassins to work , in order to have , if wanted , the right of using reprisals ; but we must not believe everything ministers say , nor everything their enemies say .
these attempts did not prevent the cardinal , to whom his most inveterate detractors have never denied personal bravery , from making nocturnal excursions , sometimes to communicate to the duc dangouleme important orders , sometimes to confer with the king , and sometimes to have an interview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see at home .
on their part the musketeers , who had not much to do with the siege , were not under very strict orders and led a joyous life .
the was the more easy for our three companions in particular ; for being friends of m. de treville , they obtained from him special permission to be absent after the closing of the camp .
now , one evening when dartagnan , who was in the trenches , was not able to accompany them , athos , porthos , and aramis , mounted on their battle steeds , enveloped in their war cloaks , with their hands upon their pistol butts , were returning from a drinking place called the red dovecot , which athos had discovered two days before upon the route to jarrie , following the road which led to the camp and quite on their guard , as we have stated , for fear of an ambuscade , when , about a quarter of a league from the village of boisnau , they fancied they heard the sound of horses approaching them . they immediately all three halted , closed in , and waited , occupying the middle of the road . in an instant , and as the moon broke from behind a cloud , they saw at a turning of the road two horsemen who , on perceiving them , stopped in their turn , appearing to deliberate whether they should continue their route or go back .
the hesitation created some suspicion in the three friends , and athos , advancing a few paces in front of the others , cried in a firm voice , " who goes there ? "
" who goes there , yourselves ? " replied one of the horsemen .
" that is not an answer , " replied athos .
" who goes there ?
answer , or we charge . "
" beware of what you are about , gentlemen ! " said a clear voice which seemed accustomed to command .
" it is some superior officer making his night rounds , " said athos . " what do you wish , gentlemen ? "
" who are you ? " said the same voice , in the same commanding tone . " answer in your turn , or you may repent of your disobedience . "
" king s musketeers , " said athos , more and more convinced that he who interrogated them had the right to do so .
" what company ? "
" company of treville . "
" advance , and give an account of what you are doing here at this hour . "
one of the two riders , he who had spoken second , was ten paces in front of his companion . athos made a sign to porthos and aramis also to remain in the rear , and advanced alone .
" your pardon , my officer , " said athos ; " but we were ignorant with whom we had to do , and you may see that we were good guard . "
" your name ? " said the officer , who covered a part of his face with his cloak .
" but yourself , monsieur , " said athos , who began to be annoyed by this inquisition , " give me , i beg you , the proof that you have the right to question me . "
" your name ? " repeated the cavalier a second time , letting his cloak fall , and leaving his face uncovered .
" monsieur the cardinal ! " cried the stupefied musketeer .
" your name ? " cried his eminence , for the third time .
" athos , " said the musketeer .
the cardinal made a sign to his attendant , who drew near .
" these three musketeers shall follow us , " said he , in an undertone . " i am not willing it should be known i have left the camp ; and if they follow us we shall be certain they will tell nobody . "
" we are gentlemen , monseigneur , " said athos ; " require our parole , and give yourself no uneasiness .
thank god , we can keep a secret . "
the cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageous speaker .
" you have a quick ear , monsieur athos , " said the cardinal ; " but now listen to this . it is not from mistrust that i request you to follow me , but for my security . your companions are no doubt messieurs porthos and aramis . "
" yes , your eminence , " said athos , while the two musketeers who had remained behind advanced hat in hand .
" i know you , gentlemen , " said the cardinal , " i know you . i know you are not quite my friends , and i am sorry you are not so ; but i know you are brave and loyal gentlemen , and that confidence may be placed in you .
monsieur athos , do me , then , the honor to accompany me ; you and your two friends , and then i shall have an escort to excite envy in his majesty , if we should meet him . "
the three musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses .
" well , upon my honor , " said athos , " your eminence is right in taking us with you ; we have seen several ill - looking faces on the road , and we have even had a quarrel at the red dovecot with four of those faces . "
" a quarrel , and what for , gentlemen ? " said the cardinal ; " you know i do nt like quarrelers . "
" and that is the reason why i have the honor to inform your eminence of what has happened ; for you might learn it from others , and upon a false account believe us to be in fault . "
" what have been the results of your quarrel ? " said the cardinal , knitting his brow .
" my friend , aramis , here , has received a slight sword wound in the arm , but not enough to prevent him , as your eminence may see , from mounting to the assault tomorrow , if your eminence orders an escalade . "
" but you are not the men to allow sword wounds to be inflicted upon you thus , " said the cardinal . " come , be frank , gentlemen , you have settled accounts with somebody ! confess ; you know i have the right of giving absolution . "
" i , monseigneur ? " said athos . " i did not even draw my sword , but i took him who offended me round the body , and threw him out of the window . it appears that in falling , " continued athos , with some hesitation , " he broke his thigh . "
" ah , ah ! " said the cardinal ; " and you , monsieur porthos ? "
" i , monseigneur , knowing that dueling is prohibited -- i seized a bench , and gave one of those brigands such a blow that i believe his shoulder is broken . "
" very well , " said the cardinal ; " and you , monsieur aramis ? "
and pray what was this quarrel about ? " " these fellows were drunk , " said athos , " and knowing there was a lady who had arrived at the cabaret this evening , they wanted to force her door . "
" force her door ! " said the cardinal , " and for what purpose ? "
" to do her violence , without doubt , " said athos . " i have had the honor of informing your eminence that these men were drunk . "
" and was this lady young and handsome ? " asked the cardinal , with a certain degree of anxiety .
" we did not see her , monseigneur , " said athos .
" you did not see her ? ah , very well , " replied the cardinal , quickly . " you did well to defend the honor of a woman ; and as i am going to the red dovecot myself , i shall know if you have told me the truth . "
" monseigneur , " said athos , haughtily , " we are gentlemen , and to save our heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood . "
" therefore i do not doubt what you say , monsieur athos , i do not doubt it for a single instant ; but , " added he , " to change the conversation , was this lady alone ? "
" the lady had a cavalier shut up with her , " said athos , " but as notwithstanding the noise , this cavalier did not show himself , it is to be presumed that he is a coward . "
"  judge not rashly  , says the gospel , " replied the cardinal .
athos bowed .
" and now , gentlemen , that s well , " continued the cardinal . " i know what i wish to know ; follow me . "
the three musketeers passed behind his eminence , who again enveloped his face in his cloak , and put his horse in motion , keeping from eight to ten paces in advance of his four companions .
they soon arrived at the silent , solitary inn . no doubt the host knew what illustrious visitor was expected , and had consequently sent intruders out of the way .
ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to his esquire and the three musketeers to halt . a saddled horse was fastened to the window shutter . the cardinal knocked three times , and in a peculiar manner .
a man , enveloped in a cloak , came out immediately , and exchanged some rapid words with the cardinal ; after which he mounted his horse , and set off in the direction of surgeres , which was likewise the way to paris .
" advance , gentlemen , " said the cardinal .
" you have told me the truth , my gentlemen , " said he , addressing the musketeers , " and it will not be my fault if our encounter this evening be not advantageous to you . in the meantime , follow me . "
the host stood at the door . for him , the cardinal was only an officer coming to visit a lady .
" have you any chamber on the ground floor where these gentlemen can wait near a good fire ? " said the cardinal .
the host opened the door of a large room , in which an old stove had just been replaced by a large and excellent chimney . " i have this , " said he .
" that will do , " replied the cardinal .
" enter , gentlemen , and be kind enough to wait for me ; i shall not be more than half an hour . "
and while the three musketeers entered the ground floor room , the cardinal , without asking further information , ascended the staircase like a man who has no need of having his road pointed out to him .
44 the utility of stovepipes
it was evident that without suspecting it , and actuated solely by their chivalrous and adventurous character , our three friends had just rendered a service to someone the cardinal honored with his special protection .
now , who was that someone ?
that was the question the three musketeers put to one another . then , seeing that none of their replies could throw any light on the subject , porthos called the host and asked for dice .
porthos and aramis placed themselves at the table and began to play .
while thinking and walking , athos passed and repassed before the pipe of the stove , broken in halves , the other extremity passing into the chamber above ; and every time he passed and repassed he heard a murmur of words , which at length fixed his attention .
athos went close to it , and distinguished some words that appeared to merit so great an interest that he made a sign to his friends to be silent , remaining himself bent with his ear directed to the opening of the lower orifice .
" listen , milady , " said the cardinal , " the affair is important . sit down , and let us talk it over . "
" milady ! " murmured athos .
" i listen to your eminence with greatest attention , " replied a female voice which made the musketeer start .
" a small vessel with an english crew , whose captain is on my side , awaits you at the mouth of charente , at fort of the point . he will set sail tomorrow morning . "
" i must go thither tonight ? " " instantly !
that is to say , when you have received my instructions .
" yes , monseigneur .
athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two companions to fasten the door inside , and to make them a sign to come and listen with him .
the two musketeers , who loved their ease , brought a chair for each of themselves and one for athos .
all three then sat down with their heads together and their ears on the alert .
" you will go to london , " continued the cardinal .
" arrived in london , you will seek buckingham . "
" i must beg your eminence to observe , " said milady , " that since the affair of the diamond studs , about which the duke always suspected me , his grace distrusts me . "
" well , this time , " said the cardinal , " it is not necessary to steal his confidence , but to present yourself frankly and loyally as a negotiator . "
" frankly and loyally , " repeated milady , with an unspeakable expression of duplicity .
" yes , frankly and loyally , " replied the cardinal , in the same tone . " all this negotiation must be carried on openly . "
" i will follow your eminence s instructions to the letter . i only wait till you give them . "
" you will go to buckingham in my behalf , and you will tell him i am acquainted with all the preparations he has made ; but that they give me no uneasiness , since at the first step he takes i will ruin the queen . "
" will he believe that your eminence is in a position to accomplish the threat thus made ? "
" yes ; for i have the proofs . "
" i must be able to present these proofs for his appreciation . "
" well , monseigneur ? "
" is that all , monseigneur ? "
" i will tell him that . "
" tell him further that i hold montague in my power ; that montague is in the bastille ; that no letters were found upon him , it is true , but that torture may make him tell much of what he knows , and even what he does not know . "
" exactly . "
" then add that his grace has , in the precipitation with which he quit the isle of re , forgotten and left behind him in his lodging a certain letter from madame de chevreuse which singularly compromises the queen , inasmuch as it proves not only that her majesty can love the enemies of the king but that she can conspire with the enemies of france .
you recollect perfectly all i have told you , do you not ? "
" your eminence will judge : the ball of madame the constable ; the night at the louvre ; the evening at amiens ; the arrest of montague ; the letter of madame de chevreuse . "
" that s it , " said the cardinal , " that s it . you have an excellent memory , milady . "
" but , " resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed this flattering compliment , " if , in spite of all these reasons , the duke does not give way and continues to menace france ? "
" the duke is in love to madness , or rather to folly , " replied richelieu , with great bitterness . " like the ancient paladins , he has only undertaken this war to obtain a look from his lady love .
if he becomes certain that this war will cost the honor , and perhaps the liberty , of the lady of his thoughts , as he says , i will answer for it he will look twice . "
" and yet , " said milady , with a persistence that proved she wished to see clearly to the end of the mission with which she was about to be charged , " if he persists ? "
" if he persists ? " said the cardinal . " that is not probable . "
" it is possible , " said milady .
" if he persists-- " his eminence made a pause , and resumed : " if he persists -- well , then i shall hope for one of those events which change the destinies of states . "
" if your eminence would quote to me some one of these events in history , " said milady , " perhaps i should partake of your confidence as to the future . "
" well , here , for example , " said richelieu : " when , in 1610 , for a cause similar to that which moves the duke , king henry iv , of glorious memory , was about , at the same time , to invade flanders and italy , in order to attack austria on both sides . well , did there not happen an event which saved austria ?
why should not the king of france have the same chance as the emperor ? "
" your eminence means , i presume , the knife stab in the rue de la feronnerie ? "
" precisely , " said the cardinal .
" does not your eminence fear that the punishment inflicted upon ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the idea of imitating him ? "
" there will be , in all times and in all countries , particularly if religious divisions exist in those countries , fanatics who ask nothing better than to become martyrs .
ay , and observe -- it just occurs to me that the puritans are furious against buckingham , and their preachers designate him as the antichrist . "
" well ? " said milady .
" well , " continued the cardinal , in an indifferent tone , " the only thing to be sought for at this moment is some woman , handsome , young , and clever , who has cause of quarrel with the duke .
the duke has had many affairs of gallantry ; and if he has fostered his amours by promises of eternal constancy , he must likewise have sown the seeds of hatred by his eternal infidelities . "
" no doubt , " said milady , coolly , " such a woman may be found . "
" well , such a woman , who would place the knife of jacques clement or of ravaillac in the hands of a fanatic , would save france . "
" yes ; but she would then be the accomplice of an assassination . "
" were the accomplices of ravaillac or of jacques clement ever known ? "
" no ; for perhaps they were too high - placed for anyone to dare look for them where they were . the palace of justice would not be burned down for everybody , monseigneur . "
" you think , then , that the fire at the palace of justice was not caused by chance ? " asked richelieu , in the tone with which he would have put a question of no importance . " i , monseigneur ? " replied milady .
" i think nothing ; i quote a fact , that is all . only i say that if i were named madame de montpensier , or the queen marie de medicis , i should use less precautions than i take , being simply called milady clarik . "
" that is just , " said richelieu . " what do you require , then ? "
" i require an order which would ratify beforehand all that i should think proper to do for the greatest good of france . "
" but in the first place , this woman i have described must be found who is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke . "
" she is found , " said milady .
" then the miserable fanatic must be found who will serve as an instrument of god s justice . "
" he will be found . "
" well , " said the cardinal , " then it will be time to claim the order which you just now required . "
" your eminence is right , " replied milady ; " and i have been wrong in seeing in the mission with which you honor me anything but that which it really is -- that is , to announce to his grace , on the part of your eminence , that you are acquainted with the different disguises by means of which he succeeded in approaching the queen during the fete given by madame the constable ; that you have proofs of the interview granted at the louvre by the queen to a certain italian astrologer who was no other than the duke of buckingham ; that you have ordered a little romance of a satirical nature to be written upon the adventures of amiens , with a plan of the gardens in which those adventures took place , and portraits of the actors who figured in them ; that montague is in the bastille , and that the torture may make him say things he remembers , and even things he has forgotten ; that you possess a certain letter from madame de chevreuse , found in his grace s lodging , which singularly compromises not only her who wrote it , but her in whose name it was written .
then , if he persists , notwithstanding all this -- as that is , as i have said , the limit of my mission -- i shall have nothing to do but to pray god to work a miracle for the salvation of france .
that is it , is it not , monseigneur , and i shall have nothing else to do ? "
" that is it , " replied the cardinal , dryly .
" and now , " said milady , without appearing to remark the change of the duke s tone toward her--"now that i have received the instructions of your eminence as concerns your enemies , monseigneur will permit me to say a few words to him of mine ? "
" have you enemies , then ? " asked richelieu .
" yes , monseigneur , enemies against whom you owe me all your support , for i made them by serving your eminence . "
" who are they ? " replied the duke .
" in the first place , there is a little intrigante named bonacieux . "
" she is in the prison of nantes . "
" that is to say , she was there , " replied milady ; " but the queen has obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed to a convent . "
" to a convent ? " said the duke .
" yes , to a convent . "
" and to which ? "
" i do nt know ; the secret has been well kept . "
" but i will know ! "
" and your eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is ? "
" i can see nothing inconvenient in that , " said the cardinal .
" well , now i have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this little madame bonacieux . "
" who is that ? "
" her lover . "
" he is the evil genius of both of us .
" ah , ah ! " said the cardinal , " i know of whom you speak . "
" i mean that miserable dartagnan . "
" he is a bold fellow , " said the cardinal .
" and it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he is the more to be feared . "
" i must have , " said the duke , " a proof of his connection with buckingham . "
" a proof ? " cried milady ; " i will have ten . "
" well , then , it becomes the simplest thing in the world ; get me that proof , and i will send him to the bastille . "
" so far good , monseigneur ; but afterwards ? "
" when once in the bastille , there is no afterward ! " said the cardinal , in a low voice .
" ah , pardieu ! " continued he , " if it were as easy for me to get rid of my enemy as it is easy to get rid of yours , and if it were against such people you require impunity-- "
" monseigneur , " replied milady , " a fair exchange . life for life , man for man ; give me one , i will give you the other . "
" i do nt know what you mean , nor do i even desire to know what you mean , " replied the cardinal ; " but i wish to please you , and see nothing out of the way in giving you what you demand with respect to so infamous a creature -- the more so as you tell me this dartagnan is a libertine , a duelist , and a traitor . "
" an infamous scoundrel , monseigneur , a scoundrel ! "
" give me paper , a quill , and some ink , then , " said the cardinal .
" here they are , monseigneur . "
there was a moment of silence , which proved that the cardinal was employed in seeking the terms in which he should write the note , or else in writing it .
athos , who had not lost a word of the conversation , took his two companions by the hand , and led them to the other end of the room .
" well , " said porthos , " what do you want , and why do you not let us listen to the end of the conversation ? "
" hush ! " said athos , speaking in a low voice . " we have heard all it was necessary we should hear ; besides , i do nt prevent you from listening , but i must be gone . "
" you must be gone ! " said porthos ; " and if the cardinal asks for you , what answer can we make ? "
" be prudent , athos , " said aramis .
" be easy on that head , " replied athos ; " you know i am cool enough . "
porthos and aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe .
as to athos , he went out without any mystery , took his horse , which was tied with those of his friends to the fastenings of the shutters , in four words convinced the attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for their return , carefully examined the priming of his pistols , drew his sword , and took , like a forlorn hope , the road to the camp .
45 a conjugal scene
as athos had foreseen , it was not long before the cardinal came down . he opened the door of the room in which the musketeers were , and found porthos playing an earnest game of dice with aramis .
he cast a rapid glance around the room , and perceived that one of his men was missing .
" what has become of monseigneur athos ? " asked he .
" monseigneur , " replied porthos , " he has gone as a scout , on account of some words of our host , which made him believe the road was not safe . "
" and you , what have you done , monsieur porthos ? "
" i have won five pistoles of aramis . "
" well ; now will you return with me ? "
" we are at your eminence s orders . "
" to horse , then , gentlemen ; for it is getting late . "
the attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the two musketeers had already said with respect to athos .
the cardinal made an approving gesture , and retraced his route with the same precautions he had used incoming .
let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected by his esquire and the two musketeers , and return to athos .
for a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which he started ; but when out of sight he turned his horse to the right , made a circuit , and came back within twenty paces of a high hedge to watch the passage of the little troop . having recognized the laced hats of his companions and the golden fringe of the cardinal s cloak , he waited till the horsemen had turned the angle of the road , and having lost sight of them , he returned at a gallop to the inn , which was opened to him without hesitation .
the host recognized him .
" my officer , " said athos , " has forgotten to give a piece of very important information to the lady , and has sent me back to repair his forgetfulness . "
" go up , " said the host ; " she is still in her chamber . "
athos availed himself of the permission , ascended the stairs with his lightest step , gained the landing , and through the open door perceived milady putting on her hat .
he entered the chamber and closed the door behind him .
at the noise he made in pushing the bolt , milady turned round .
athos was standing before the door , enveloped in his cloak , with his hat pulled down over his eyes .
on seeing this figure , mute and immovable as a statue , milady was frightened .
" who are you , and what do you want ? " cried she .
" humph , " murmured athos , " it is certainly she ! "
and letting fall his cloak and raising his hat , he advanced toward milady .
" do you know me , madame ? " said he .
milady made one step forward , and then drew back as if she had seen a serpent .
" so far , well , " said athos , " i perceive you know me . "
" the comte de la fere ! " murmured milady , becoming exceedingly pale , and drawing back till the wall prevented her from going any farther .
" yes , milady , " replied athos ; " the comte de la fere in person , who comes expressly from the other world to have the pleasure of paying you a visit .
sit down , madame , and let us talk , as the cardinal said . "
milady , under the influence of inexpressible terror , sat down without uttering a word .
" you certainly are a demon sent upon the earth ! " said athos .
i thought i had crushed you , madame ; but either i was deceived or hell has resuscitated you ! "
milady at these words , which recalled frightful remembrances , hung down her head with a suppressed groan .
" yes , hell has resuscitated you , " continued athos . " hell has made you rich , hell has given you another name , hell has almost made you another face ; but it has neither effaced the stains from your soul nor the brand from your body . "
milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring , and her eyes flashed lightning .
athos remained sitting .
" you believed me to be dead , did you not , as i believed you to be ? and the name of athos as well concealed the comte de la fere , as the name milady clarik concealed anne de breuil .
" but , " said milady , in a hollow , faint voice , " what brings you back to me , and what do you want with me ? "
" i wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your eyes , i have not lost sight of you . "
" you know what i have done ? "
" i can relate to you , day by day , your actions from your entrance to the service of the cardinal to this evening . "
a smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of milady . " listen !
milady was livid .
" monsieur dartagnan has cruelly insulted me , " said milady , in a hollow tone ; " monsieur dartagnan shall die ! "
" indeed ! is it possible to insult you , madame ? " said athos , laughing ; " he has insulted you , and he shall die ! "
" he shall die ! " replied milady ; " she first , and he afterward . "
milady , pale as a corpse , endeavored to cry out ; but her swollen tongue could utter no more than a hoarse sound which had nothing human in it and resembled the rattle of a wild beast .
nevertheless , she remained motionless . " you have one second to decide , " said he .
milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that the trigger was about to be pulled ; she reached her hand quickly to her bosom , drew out a paper , and held it toward athos .
" take it , " said she , " and be accursed ! "
athos took the paper , returned the pistol to his belt , approached the lamp to be assured that it was the paper , unfolded it , and read : dec . 3 , 1627
it is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this has done what he has done .
richelieu
" and now , " said athos , resuming his cloak and putting on his hat , " now that i have drawn your teeth , viper , bite if you can . "
and he left the chamber without once looking behind him .
at the door he found the two men and the spare horse which they held .
" gentlemen , " said he , " monseigneur s order is , you know , to conduct that woman , without losing time , to the fort of the point , and never to leave her till she is on board . "
as these words agreed wholly with the order they had received , they bowed their heads in sign of assent .
with regard to athos , he leaped lightly into the saddle and set out at full gallop ; only instead of following the road , he went across the fields , urging his horse to the utmost and stopping occasionally to listen .
in one of those halts he heard the steps of several horses on the road .
he had no doubt it was the cardinal and his escort .
he immediately made a new point in advance , rubbed his horse down with some heath and leaves of trees , and placed himself across the road , about two hundred paces from the camp .
" who goes there ? " cried he , as soon as he perceived the horsemen .
" that is our brave musketeer , i think , " said the cardinal .
" yes , monseigneur , " said porthos , " it is he . "
" monsieur athos , " said richelieu , " receive my thanks for the good guard you have kept . gentlemen , we are arrived ; take the gate on the left . the watchword is ,  king and re .  "
saying these words , the cardinal saluted the three friends with an inclination of his head , and took the right hand , followed by his attendant -- for that night he himself slept in the camp .
" well ! " said porthos and aramis together , as soon as the cardinal was out of hearing , " well , he signed the paper she required ! "
and the three friends did not exchange another word till they reached their quarters , except to give the watchword to the sentinels .
only they sent mousqueton to tell planchet that his master was requested , the instant that he left the trenches , to come to the quarters of the musketeers .
in consequence , after having traveled all night , at seven oclock she was at the fort of the point ; at eight oclock she had embarked ; and at nine , the vessel , which with letters of marque from the cardinal was supposed to be sailing for bayonne , raised anchor , and steered its course toward england .
46 the bastion saint - gervais
on arriving at the lodgings of his three friends , dartagnan found them assembled in the same chamber . athos was meditating ; porthos was twisting his mustache ; aramis was saying his prayers in a charming little book of hours , bound in blue velvet .
" pardieu , gentlemen , " said he . " i hope what you have to tell me is worth the trouble , or else , i warn you , i will not pardon you for making me come here instead of getting a little rest after a night spent in taking and dismantling a bastion .
ah , why were you not there , gentlemen ? it was warm work . "
" we were in a place where it was not very cold , " replied porthos , giving his mustache a twist which was peculiar to him .
" hush ! " said athos .
" oh , oh ! " said dartagnan , comprehending the slight frown of the musketeer . " it appears there is something fresh aboard . "
" aramis , " said athos , " you went to breakfast the day before yesterday at the inn of the parpaillot , i believe ? "
" yes . "
" how did you fare ? "
" for my part , i ate but little . the day before yesterday was a fish day , and they had nothing but meat . "
" what , " said athos , " no fish at a seaport ? "
" they say , " said aramis , resuming his pious reading , " that the dyke which the cardinal is making drives them all out into the open sea . "
" but that is not quite what i mean to ask you , aramis , " replied athos . " i want to know if you were left alone , and nobody interrupted you . "
" why , i think there were not many intruders . yes , athos , i know what you mean : we shall do very well at the parpaillot . "
" let us go to the parpaillot , then , for here the walls are like sheets of paper . "
dartagnan , who was accustomed to his friend s manner of acting , and who perceived immediately , by a word , a gesture , or a sign from him , that the circumstances were serious , took athos s arm , and went out without saying anything . porthos followed , chatting with aramis .
on their way they met grimaud . athos made him a sign to come with them . grimaud , according to custom , obeyed in silence ; the poor lad had nearly come to the pass of forgetting how to speak .
they arrived at the drinking room of the parpaillot . it was seven oclock in the morning , and daylight began to appear . the three friends ordered breakfast , and went into a room in which the host said they would not be disturbed .
unfortunately , the hour was badly chosen for a private conference . the morning drum had just been beaten ; everyone shook off the drowsiness of night , and to dispel the humid morning air , came to take a drop at the inn . dragoons , swiss , guardsmen , musketeers , light - horsemen , succeeded one another with a rapidity which might answer the purpose of the host very well , but agreed badly with the views of the four friends .
thus they applied very curtly to the salutations , healths , and jokes of their companions .
" i see how it will be , " said athos : " we shall get into some pretty quarrel or other , and we have no need of one just now .
dartagnan , tell us what sort of a night you have had , and we will describe ours afterward . "
" ah , yes , " said a light - horseman , with a glass of brandy in his hand , which he sipped slowly . " i hear you gentlemen of the guards have been in the trenches tonight , and that you did not get much the best of the rochellais . "
dartagnan looked at athos to know if he ought to reply to this intruder who thus mixed unasked in their conversation .
" well , " said athos , " do nt you hear monsieur de busigny , who does you the honor to ask you a question ?
relate what has passed during the night , since these gentlemen desire to know it . "
" have you not taken a bastion ? " said a swiss , who was drinking rum out of a beer glass .
" yes , monsieur , " said dartagnan , bowing , " we have had that honor . we even have , as you may have heard , introduced a barrel of powder under one of the angles , which in blowing up made a very pretty breach . without reckoning that as the bastion was not built yesterday all the rest of the building was badly shaken . "
" and what bastion is it ? " asked a dragoon , with his saber run through a goose which he was taking to be cooked .
" the bastion st . gervais , " replied dartagnan , " from behind which the rochellais annoyed our workmen . "
" was that affair hot ? "
" yes , moderately so . we lost five men , and the rochellais eight or ten . "
" balzempleu ! " said the swiss , who , notwithstanding the admirable collection of oaths possessed by the german language , had acquired a habit of swearing in french .
" but it is probable , " said the light - horseman , " that they will send pioneers this morning to repair the bastion . "
" yes , that s probable , " said dartagnan .
" gentlemen , " said athos , " a wager ! "
" ah , wooi , a vager ! " cried the swiss .
" what is it ? " said the light - horseman .
" stop a bit , " said the dragoon , placing his saber like a spit upon the two large iron dogs which held the firebrands in the chimney , " stop a bit , i am in it .
you cursed host ! a dripping pan immediately , that i may not lose a drop of the fat of this estimable bird . "
" you was right , " said the swiss ; " goose grease is kood with basdry . "
" there ! " said the dragoon .
" now for the wager !
we listen , monsieur athos . "
" yes , the wager ! " said the light - horseman .
" well , monsieur de busigny , i will bet you , " said athos , " that my three companions , messieurs porthos , aramis , and dartagnan , and myself , will go and breakfast in the bastion st . gervais , and we will remain there an hour , by the watch , whatever the enemy may do to dislodge us . "
porthos and aramis looked at each other ; they began to comprehend .
" but , " said dartagnan , in the ear of athos , " you are going to get us all killed without mercy . "
" we are much more likely to be killed , " said athos , " if we do not go . "
" my faith , gentlemen , " said porthos , turning round upon his chair and twisting his mustache , " that s a fair bet , i hope . "
" i take it , " said m. de busigny ; " so let us fix the stake . "
" you are four gentlemen , " said athos , " and we are four ; an unlimited dinner for eight . will that do ? "
" capitally , " replied m. de busigny .
" perfectly , " said the dragoon .
" that shoots me , " said the swiss .
the fourth auditor , who during all this conversation had played a mute part , made a sign of the head in proof that he acquiesced in the proposition .
" the breakfast for these gentlemen is ready , " said the host .
" well , bring it , " said athos .
the host obeyed .
athos called grimaud , pointed to a large basket which lay in a corner , and made a sign to him to wrap the viands up in the napkins .
grimaud understood that it was to be a breakfast on the grass , took the basket , packed up the viands , added the bottles , and then took the basket on his arm .
" but where are you going to eat my breakfast ? " asked the host .
" shall i give you the change , my officer ? " said the host .
" no , only add two bottles of champagne , and the difference will be for the napkins . "
the host had not quite so good a bargain as he at first hoped for , but he made amends by slipping in two bottles of anjou wine instead of two bottles of champagne .
" monsieur de busigny , " said athos , " will you be so kind as to set your watch with mine , or permit me to regulate mine by yours ? "
" which you please , monsieur ! " said the light - horseman , drawing from his fob a very handsome watch , studded with diamonds ; " half past seven . "
" thirty - five minutes after seven , " said athos , " by which you perceive i am five minutes faster than you . "
and bowing to all the astonished persons present , the young men took the road to the bastion st . gervais , followed by grimaud , who carried the basket , ignorant of where he was going but in the passive obedience which athos had taught him not even thinking of asking .
but when once they passed the line of circumvallation and found themselves in the open plain , dartagnan , who was completely ignorant of what was going forward , thought it was time to demand an explanation .
" and now , my dear athos , " said he , " do me the kindness to tell me where we are going ? "
" why , you see plainly enough we are going to the bastion . "
" but what are we going to do there ? "
" you know well that we go to breakfast there . "
" but why did we not breakfast at the parpaillot ? "
" where we should have been seen all four conferring together , so that at the end of a quarter of an hour the cardinal would have been informed by his spies that we were holding a council . "
" yes , " said aramis , " athos is right : animadvertuntur in desertis . "
" a desert would not have been amiss , " said porthos ; " but it behooved us to find it . "
" there is no desert where a bird can not pass over one s head , where a fish can not leap out of the water , where a rabbit can not come out of its burrow , and i believe that bird , fish , and rabbit each becomes a spy of the cardinal .
you see that everything is to our advantage . "
" yes , " said dartagnan ; " but we shall indubitably attract a ball . "
" well , my dear , " replied athos , " you know well that the balls most to be dreaded are not from the enemy . "
" but for such an expedition we surely ought to have brought our muskets . "
" you are stupid , friend porthos . why should we load ourselves with a useless burden ? "
" i do nt find a good musket , twelve cartridges , and a powder flask very useless in the face of an enemy . "
" well , " replied athos , " have you not heard what dartagnan said ? "
" what did he say ? " demanded porthos .
" dartagnan said that in the attack of last night eight or ten frenchmen were killed , and as many rochellais . "
" what then ? "
" well ? "
" oh , athos ! " said aramis , " truly you are a great man . "
porthos nodded in sign of agreement .
dartagnan alone did not seem convinced .
grimaud no doubt shared the misgivings of the young man , for seeing that they continued to advance toward the bastion -- something he had till then doubted -- he pulled his master by the skirt of his coat .
" where are we going ? " asked he , by a gesture .
athos pointed to the bastion .
" but , " said grimaud , in the same silent dialect , " we shall leave our skins there . "
athos raised his eyes and his finger toward heaven .
grimaud put his basket on the ground and sat down with a shake of the head .
athos took a pistol from his belt , looked to see if it was properly primed , cocked it , and placed the muzzle close to grimaud s ear .
grimaud was on his legs again as if by a spring .
athos then made him a sign to take up his basket and to walk on first .
grimaud obeyed .
all that grimaud gained by this momentary pantomime was to pass from the rear guard to the vanguard .
arrived at the bastion , the four friends turned round .
more than three hundred soldiers of all kinds were assembled at the gate of the camp ; and in a separate group might be distinguished m. de busigny , the dragoon , the swiss , and the fourth bettor .
athos took off his hat , placed it on the end of his sword , and waved it in the air .
all the spectators returned him his salute , accompanying this courtesy with a loud hurrah which was audible to the four ; after which all four disappeared in the bastion , whither grimaud had preceded them .
47 the council of the musketeers
as athos had foreseen , the bastion was only occupied by a dozen corpses , french and rochellais .
" gentlemen , " said athos , who had assumed the command of the expedition , " while grimaud spreads the table , let us begin by collecting the guns and cartridges together . we can talk while performing that necessary task .
these gentlemen , " added he , pointing to the bodies , " can not hear us . "
" but we could throw them into the ditch , " said porthos , " after having assured ourselves they have nothing in their pockets . "
" yes , " said athos , " that s grimaud s business . "
" well , then , " cried dartagnan , " pray let grimaud search them and throw them over the walls . "
" heaven forfend ! " said athos ; " they may serve us . "
" these bodies serve us ? " said porthos .
" you are mad , dear friend . "
" judge not rashly , say the gospel and the cardinal , " replied athos . " how many guns , gentlemen ? "
" twelve , " replied aramis .
" how many shots ? "
" a hundred . "
" that s quite as many as we shall want .
let us load the guns . "
the four musketeers went to work ; and as they were loading the last musket grimaud announced that the breakfast was ready .
athos replied , always by gestures , that that was well , and indicated to grimaud , by pointing to a turret that resembled a pepper caster , that he was to stand as sentinel .
only , to alleviate the tediousness of the duty , athos allowed him to take a loaf , two cutlets , and a bottle of wine .
" and now to table , " said athos .
the four friends seated themselves on the ground with their legs crossed like turks , or even tailors .
" and now , " said dartagnan , " as there is no longer any fear of being overheard , i hope you are going to let me into your secret . "
" i hope at the same time to procure you amusement and glory , gentlemen , " said athos .
" i have induced you to take a charming promenade ; here is a delicious breakfast ; and yonder are five hundred persons , as you may see through the loopholes , taking us for heroes or madmen -- two classes of imbeciles greatly resembling each other . "
" but the secret ! " said dartagnan .
" the secret is , " said athos , " that i saw milady last night . "
dartagnan was lifting a glass to his lips ; but at the name of milady , his hand trembled so , that he was obliged to put the glass on the ground again for fear of spilling the contents . "
" you saw your wi-- "
" hush ! " interrupted athos . " you forget , my dear , you forget that these gentlemen are not initiated into my family affairs like yourself . i have seen milady . "
" where ? " demanded dartagnan .
" within two leagues of this place , at the inn of the red dovecot . "
" in that case i am lost , " said dartagnan .
" not so bad yet , " replied athos ; " for by this time she must have quit the shores of france . "
dartagnan breathed again .
" but after all , " asked porthos , " who is milady ? "
" a charming woman ! " said athos , sipping a glass of sparkling wine .
" villainous host ! " cried he , " he has given us anjou wine instead of champagne , and fancies we know no better !
yes , " continued he , " a charming woman , who entertained kind views toward our friend dartagnan , who , on his part , has given her some offense for which she tried to revenge herself a month ago by having him killed by two musket shots , a week ago by trying to poison him , and yesterday by demanding his head of the cardinal . "
" what ! by demanding my head of the cardinal ? " cried dartagnan , pale with terror .
" yes , that is true as the gospel , " said porthos ; " i heard her with my own ears . "
" i also , " said aramis .
" then , " said dartagnan , letting his arm fall with discouragement , " it is useless to struggle longer . i may as well blow my brains out , and all will be over . "
" that s the last folly to be committed , " said athos , " seeing it is the only one for which there is no remedy . "
" but i can never escape , " said dartagnan , " with such enemies .
first , my stranger of meung ; then de wardes , to whom i have given three sword wounds ; next milady , whose secret i have discovered ; finally , the cardinal , whose vengeance i have balked . "
" well , " said athos , " that only makes four ; and we are four -- one for one .
pardieu ! if we may believe the signs grimaud is making , we are about to have to do with a very different number of people .
what is it , grimaud ?
considering the gravity of the occasion , i permit you to speak , my friend ; but be laconic , i beg .
what do you see ? "
" a troop . "
" of how many persons ? "
" twenty men . "
" what sort of men ? "
" sixteen pioneers , four soldiers . "
" how far distant ? "
" five hundred paces . "
" good ! we have just time to finish this fowl and to drink one glass of wine to your health , dartagnan . "
" to your health ! " repeated porthos and aramis .
" well , then , to my health ! although i am very much afraid that your good wishes will not be of great service to me . "
" bah ! " said athos , " god is great , as say the followers of mohammed , and the future is in his hands . "
then , swallowing the contents of his glass , which he put down close to him , athos arose carelessly , took the musket next to him , and drew near to one of the loopholes .
porthos , aramis and dartagnan followed his example .
as to grimaud , he received orders to place himself behind the four friends in order to reload their weapons .
" pardieu ! " said athos , " it was hardly worth while to distribute ourselves for twenty fellows armed with pickaxes , mattocks , and shovels .
grimaud had only to make them a sign to go away , and i am convinced they would have left us in peace . "
" i doubt that , " replied dartagnan , " for they are advancing very resolutely .
besides , in addition to the pioneers , there are four soldiers and a brigadier , armed with muskets . "
" that s because they do nt see us , " said athos .
" my faith , " said aramis , " i must confess i feel a great repugnance to fire on these poor devils of civilians . "
" he is a bad priest , " said porthos , " who has pity for heretics . "
" in truth , " said athos , " aramis is right .
i will warn them . " " what the devil are you going to do ? " cried dartagnan , " you will be shot . "
" take care , athos ! " cried dartagnan ; " do nt you see they are aiming ? "
" yes , yes , " said athos ; " but they are only civilians -- very bad marksmen , who will be sure not to hit me . "
in fact , at the same instant four shots were fired , and the balls were flattened against the wall around athos , but not one touched him .
four shots replied to them almost instantaneously , but much better aimed than those of the aggressors ; three soldiers fell dead , and one of the pioneers was wounded .
" grimaud , " said athos , still on the breach , " another musket ! "
grimaud immediately obeyed .
on their part , the three friends had reloaded their arms ; a second discharge followed the first . the brigadier and two pioneers fell dead ; the rest of the troop took to flight .
" now , gentlemen , a sortie ! " cried athos .
" reload the muskets , grimaud , " said athos , " and we , gentlemen , will go on with our breakfast , and resume our conversation .
where were we ? "
whither goes she ? " added he , strongly interested in the route milady followed .
" she goes into england , " said athos .
" with what view ? "
" with the view of assassinating , or causing to be assassinated , the duke of buckingham . "
dartagnan uttered an exclamation of surprise and indignation .
" but this is infamous ! " cried he .
" as to that , " said athos , " i beg you to believe that i care very little about it .
now you have done , grimaud , take our brigadier s half - pike , tie a napkin to it , and plant it on top of our bastion , that these rebels of rochellais may see that they have to deal with brave and loyal soldiers of the king . "
grimaud obeyed without replying .
an instant afterward , the white flag was floating over the heads of the four friends . a thunder of applause saluted its appearance ; half the camp was at the barrier .
" how ? " replied dartagnan , " you care little if she kills buckingham or causes him to be killed ?
but the duke is our friend . "
" the duke is english ; the duke fights against us . let her do what she likes with the duke ; i care no more about him than an empty bottle . "
" a moment , " said dartagnan . " i will not abandon buckingham thus . he gave us some very fine horses . "
" and moreover , very handsome saddles , " said porthos , who at the moment wore on his cloak the lace of his own .
" besides , " said aramis , " god desires the conversion and not the death of a sinner . "
" amen ! " said athos , " and we will return to that subject later , if such be your pleasure ; but what for the moment engaged my attention most earnestly , and i am sure you will understand me , dartagnan , was the getting from this woman a kind of carte blanche which she had extorted from the cardinal , and by means of which she could with impunity get rid of you and perhaps of us . "
" but this creature must be a demon ! " said porthos , holding out his plate to aramis , who was cutting up a fowl .
" and this carte blanche , " said dartagnan , " this carte blanche , does it remain in her hands ? "
" no , it passed into mine ; i will not say without trouble , for if i did i should tell a lie . "
" my dear athos , i shall no longer count the number of times i am indebted to you for my life . "
" then it was to go to her that you left us ? " said aramis .
" exactly . "
" and you have that letter of the cardinal ? " said dartagnan .
" here it is , " said athos ; and he took the invaluable paper from the pocket of his uniform .
dartagnan unfolded it with one hand , whose trembling he did not even attempt to conceal , to read :
dec . 3 , 1627
" richelieu "
" in fact , " said aramis , " it is an absolution according to rule . "
" that paper must be torn to pieces , " said dartagnan , who fancied he read in it his sentence of death .
i would not give up this paper if covered with as many gold pieces . "
" go to ! it appears to me you make dull jokes , my dear , " said porthos .
" i do not jest , " said athos .
" do you know , " said porthos , " that to twist that damned milady s neck would be a smaller sin than to twist those of these poor devils of huguenots , who have committed no other crime than singing in french the psalms we sing in latin ? "
" what says the abbe ? " asked athos , quietly .
" i say i am entirely of porthos s opinion , " replied aramis .
" and i , too , " said dartagnan .
" fortunately , she is far off , " said porthos , " for i confess she would worry me if she were here . "
" she worries me in england as well as in france , " said athos .
" she worries me everywhere , " said dartagnan .
" you think so , porthos ? " replied the musketeer , with a sad smile which dartagnan alone understood .
" i have an idea , " said dartagnan .
" what is it ? " said the musketeers .
" to arms ! " cried grimaud .
the young men sprang up , and seized their muskets .
this time a small troop advanced , consisting of from twenty to twenty - five men ; but they were not pioneers , they were soldiers of the garrison .
" shall we return to the camp ? " said porthos . " i do nt think the sides are equal . "
" impossible , for three reasons , " replied athos . " the first , that we have not finished breakfast ; the second , that we still have some very important things to say ; and the third , that it yet wants ten minutes before the lapse of the hour . "
" well , then , " said aramis , " we must form a plan of battle . " " that s very simple , " replied athos .
" bravo ! " cried porthos . " decidedly , athos , you were born to be a general , and the cardinal , who fancies himself a great soldier , is nothing beside you . "
" gentlemen , " said athos , " no divided attention , i beg ; let each one pick out his man . "
" i cover mine , " said dartagnan .
" and i mine , " said porthos .
" and i mine , " said aramis .
" fire , then , " said athos .
the four muskets made but one report , but four men fell .
the drum immediately beat , and the little troop advanced at charging pace .
then the shots were repeated without regularity , but always aimed with the same accuracy .
nevertheless , as if they had been aware of the numerical weakness of the friends , the rochellais continued to advance in quick time .
with every three shots at least two men fell ; but the march of those who remained was not slackened .
arrived at the foot of the bastion , there were still more than a dozen of the enemy . a last discharge welcomed them , but did not stop them ; they jumped into the ditch , and prepared to scale the breach .
" now , my friends , " said athos , " finish them at a blow . to the wall ; to the wall ! "
and the four friends , seconded by grimaud , pushed with the barrels of their muskets an enormous sheet of the wall , which bent as if pushed by the wind , and detaching itself from its base , fell with a horrible crash into the ditch . then a fearful crash was heard ; a cloud of dust mounted toward the sky -- and all was over !
" can we have destroyed them all , from the first to the last ? " said athos .
" my faith , it appears so ! " said dartagnan .
" no , " cried porthos ; " there go three or four , limping away . "
in fact , three or four of these unfortunate men , covered with dirt and blood , fled along the hollow way , and at length regained the city . these were all who were left of the little troop .
athos looked at his watch .
" gentlemen , " said he , " we have been here an hour , and our wager is won ; but we will be fair players . besides , dartagnan has not told us his idea yet . "
and the musketeer , with his usual coolness , reseated himself before the remains of the breakfast .
" my idea ? " said dartagnan .
" yes ; you said you had an idea , " said athos .
" you shall not do that , dartagnan , " said athos , coolly .
" and why not ? have i not been there once ? "
" yes ; but at that period we were not at war . at that period buckingham was an ally , and not an enemy . what you would now do amounts to treason . "
dartagnan perceived the force of this reasoning , and was silent .
" but , " said porthos , " i think i have an idea , in my turn . "
" silence for monsieur porthos s idea ! " said aramis .
" well , " replied athos , " i am not far from approving the idea of monsieur porthos . "
" for shame ! " said aramis . " kill a woman ?
no , listen to me ; i have the true idea . "
" let us see your idea , aramis , " said athos , who felt much deference for the young musketeer .
" we must inform the queen . "
" ah , my faith , yes ! " said porthos and dartagnan , at the same time ; " we are coming nearer to it now . "
" inform the queen ! " said athos ; " and how ?
have we relations with the court ?
could we send anyone to paris without its being known in the camp ?
from here to paris it is a hundred and forty leagues ; before our letter was at angers we should be in a dungeon . "
" as to remitting a letter with safety to her majesty , " said aramis , coloring , " i will take that upon myself . i know a clever person at tours-- "
aramis stopped on seeing athos smile .
" well , do you not adopt this means , athos ? " said dartagnan .
" i do not reject it altogether , " said athos ; " but i wish to remind aramis that he can not quit the camp , and that nobody but one of ourselves is trustworthy ; that two hours after the messenger has set out , all the capuchins , all the police , all the black caps of the cardinal , will know your letter by heart , and you and your clever person will be arrested . "
" without reckoning , " objected porthos , " that the queen would save monsieur de buckingham , but would take no heed of us . "
" gentlemen , " said dartagnan , " what porthos says is full of sense . "
" ah , ah ! but what s going on in the city yonder ? " said athos .
" they are beating the general alarm . "
the four friends listened , and the sound of the drum plainly reached them .
" you see , they are going to send a whole regiment against us , " said athos .
" you do nt think of holding out against a whole regiment , do you ? " said porthos .
" upon my word , the drum draws near , " said dartagnan .
" let it come , " said athos . " it is a quarter of an hour s journey from here to the city , consequently a quarter of an hour s journey from the city to hither .
that is more than time enough for us to devise a plan . if we go from this place we shall never find another so suitable .
ah , stop ! i have it , gentlemen ; the right idea has just occurred to me . "
" tell us . "
" allow me to give grimaud some indispensable orders . "
athos made a sign for his lackey to approach .
" grimaud , " said athos , pointing to the bodies which lay under the wall of the bastion , " take those gentlemen , set them up against the wall , put their hats upon their heads , and their guns in their hands . "
" oh , the great man ! " cried dartagnan . " i comprehend now . "
" you comprehend ? " said porthos .
" and do you comprehend , grimaud ? " said aramis .
grimaud made a sign in the affirmative .
" that s all that is necessary , " said athos ; " now for my idea . "
" i should like , however , to comprehend , " said porthos .
" that is useless . "
" yes , yes ! athos s idea ! " cried aramis and dartagnan , at the same time .
" this milady , this woman , this creature , this demon , has a brother - in - law , as i think you told me , dartagnan ? "
" yes , i know him very well ; and i also believe that he has not a very warm affection for his sister - in - law . "
" there is no harm in that . if he detested her , it would be all the better , " replied athos .
" in that case we are as well off as we wish . "
" and yet , " said porthos , " i would like to know what grimaud is about . "
" silence , porthos ! " said aramis .
" what is her brother - in - law s name ? "
" lord de winter . "
" where is he now ? "
" yes , " said dartagnan , " till she comes out . "
" but i think it would be still better , " said aramis , " to inform the queen and lord de winter at the same time . "
" yes ; but who is to carry the letter to tours , and who to london ? "
" i answer for bazin , " said aramis .
" and i for planchet , " said dartagnan .
" ay , " said porthos , " if we can not leave the camp , our lackeys may . "
" we will give them money ? " replied athos . " have you any money ? "
the four friends looked at one another , and a cloud came over the brows which but lately had been so cheerful .
why did you talk of a regiment , athos ?
it is a veritable army ! " " my faith , yes , " said athos ; " there they are .
ah , ah ! have you finished , grimaud ? "
grimaud made a sign in the affirmative , and pointed to a dozen bodies which he had set up in the most picturesque attitudes . some carried arms , others seemed to be taking aim , and the remainder appeared merely to be sword in hand .
" bravo ! " said athos ; " that does honor to your imagination . "
" all very well , " said porthos , " but i should like to understand . "
" let us decamp first , and you will understand afterward . "
" a moment , gentlemen , a moment ; give grimaud time to clear away the breakfast . "
grimaud was already ahead , with the basket and the dessert .
the four friends followed , ten paces behind him .
" what the devil shall we do now , gentlemen ? " cried athos .
" have you forgotten anything ? " said aramis .
" the white flag , morbleu !
we must not leave a flag in the hands of the enemy , even if that flag be but a napkin . "
and athos ran back to the bastion , mounted the platform , and bore off the flag ; but as the rochellais had arrived within musket range , they opened a terrible fire upon this man , who appeared to expose himself for pleasure s sake .
but athos might be said to bear a charmed life . the balls passed and whistled all around him ; not one struck him .
athos waved his flag , turning his back on the guards of the city , and saluting those of the camp .
on both sides loud cries arose -- on the one side cries of anger , on the other cries of enthusiasm .
cries were heard from the camp , " come down ! come down ! "
athos came down ; his friends , who anxiously awaited him , saw him returned with joy .
" come along , athos , come along ! " cried dartagnan ; " now we have found everything except money , it would be stupid to be killed . "
but athos continued to march majestically , whatever remarks his companions made ; and they , finding their remarks useless , regulated their pace by his .
grimaud and his basket were far in advance , out of the range of the balls .
" what s that ? " asked porthos , " what are they firing at now ? i hear no balls whistle , and i see nobody ! "
" they are firing at the corpses , " replied athos .
" but the dead can not return their fire . "
that renders it useless to get a pleurisy by too much haste . "
" oh , i comprehend now , " said the astonished porthos .
" that s lucky , " said athos , shrugging his shoulders .
on their part , the french , on seeing the four friends return at such a step , uttered cries of enthusiasm .
at length a fresh discharge was heard , and this time the balls came rattling among the stones around the four friends , and whistling sharply in their ears .
the rochellais had at last taken possession of the bastion .
" these rochellais are bungling fellows , " said athos ; " how many have we killed of them -- a dozen ? "
" or fifteen . "
" how many did we crush under the wall ? "
" eight or ten . "
" and in exchange for all that not even a scratch !
ah , but what is the matter with your hand , dartagnan ? it bleeds , seemingly . "
" oh , it s nothing , " said dartagnan .
" a spent ball ? "
" not even that . "
" what is it , then ? "
we have said that athos loved dartagnan like a child , and this somber and inflexible personage felt the anxiety of a parent for the young man .
" only grazed a little , " replied dartagnan ; " my fingers were caught between two stones -- that of the wall and that of my ring -- and the skin was broken . "
" that comes of wearing diamonds , my master , " said athos , disdainfully .
" ah , to be sure , " cried porthos , " there is a diamond . why the devil , then , do we plague ourselves about money , when there is a diamond ? "
" stop a bit ! " said aramis .
" well thought of , porthos ; this time you have an idea . "
" undoubtedly , " said porthos , drawing himself up at athos s compliment ; " as there is a diamond , let us sell it . "
" but , " said dartagnan , " it is the queen s diamond . "
" the stronger reason why it should be sold , " replied athos . the queen saving monsieur de buckingham , her lover ; nothing more just . the queen saving us , her friends ; nothing more moral . let us sell the diamond .
what says monsieur the abbe ?
i do nt ask porthos ; his opinion has been given . "
" why , i think , " said aramis , blushing as usual , " that his ring not coming from a mistress , and consequently not being a love token , dartagnan may sell it . "
" my dear aramis , you speak like theology personified .
your advice , then , is-- "
" to sell the diamond , " replied aramis .
" well , then , " said dartagnan , gaily , " let us sell the diamond , and say no more about it . "
here we are at the camp ; therefore , gentlemen , not a word more of this affair .
we are observed ; they are coming to meet us .
we shall be carried in triumph . " in fact , as we have said , the whole camp was in motion .
nothing was heard but cries of " live the musketeers !
live the guards ! "
m. de busigny was the first to come and shake athos by the hand , and acknowledge that the wager was lost .
the dragoon and the swiss followed him , and all their comrades followed the dragoon and the swiss .
there was nothing but felicitations , pressures of the hand , and embraces ; there was no end to the inextinguishable laughter at the rochellais . the tumult at length became so great that the cardinal fancied there must be some riot , and sent la houdiniere , his captain of the guards , to inquire what was going on .
the affair was described to the messenger with all the effervescence of enthusiasm .
" well ? " asked the cardinal , on seeing la houdiniere return .
" well , monseigneur , " replied the latter , " three musketeers and a guardsman laid a wager with monsieur de busigny that they would go and breakfast in the bastion st . gervais ; and while breakfasting they held it for two hours against the enemy , and have killed i do nt know how many rochellais . "
" did you inquire the names of those three musketeers ? "
" yes , monseigneur . "
" what are their names ? "
" messieurs athos , porthos , and aramis . "
" still my three brave fellows ! " murmured the cardinal .
" and the guardsman ? "
" dartagnan . "
" still my young scapegrace .
positively , these four men must be on my side . "
the same evening the cardinal spoke to m. de treville of the exploit of the morning , which was the talk of the whole camp .
m. de treville , who had received the account of the adventure from the mouths of the heroes of it , related it in all its details to his eminence , not forgetting the episode of the napkin .
" that s well , monsieur de treville , " said the cardinal ; " pray let that napkin be sent to me .
i will have three fleur - de - lis embroidered on it in gold , and will give it to your company as a standard . "
" monseigneur , " said m. de treville , " that will be unjust to the guardsmen . monsieur dartagnan is not with me ; he serves under monsieur dessessart . "
" well , then , take him , " said the cardinal ; " when four men are so much attached to one another , it is only fair that they should serve in the same company . "
that same evening m. de treville announced this good news to the three musketeers and dartagnan , inviting all four to breakfast with him next morning .
dartagnan was beside himself with joy .
we know that the dream of his life had been to become a musketeer .
the three friends were likewise greatly delighted .
" my faith , " said dartagnan to athos , " you had a triumphant idea ! as you said , we have acquired glory , and were enabled to carry on a conversation of the highest importance . "
" which we can resume now without anybody suspecting us , for , with the help of god , we shall henceforth pass for cardinalists . "
that evening dartagnan went to present his respects to m. dessessart , and inform him of his promotion .
m dessessart , who esteemed dartagnan , made him offers of help , as this change would entail expenses for equipment .
this was the price of the queen s diamond .
48 a family affair
athos had invented the phrase , family affair .
a family affair was not subject to the investigation of the cardinal ; a family affair concerned nobody . people might employ themselves in a family affair before all the world .
therefore athos had invented the phrase , family affair .
aramis had discovered the idea , the lackeys .
porthos had discovered the means , the diamond .
dartagnan alone had discovered nothing -- he , ordinarily the most inventive of the four ; but it must be also said that the very name of milady paralyzed him .
ah ! no , we were mistaken ; he had discovered a purchaser for his diamond .
the breakfast at m. de treville s was as gay and cheerful as possible .
dartagnan already wore his uniform -- for being nearly of the same size as aramis , and as aramis was so liberally paid by the publisher who purchased his poem as to allow him to buy everything double , he sold his friend a complete outfit .
dartagnan would have been at the height of his wishes if he had not constantly seen milady like a dark cloud hovering in the horizon .
after breakfast , it was agreed that they should meet again in the evening at athos s lodging , and there finish their plans .
dartagnan passed the day in exhibiting his musketeer s uniform in every street of the camp .
these four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time , and gave birth to magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they should be deemed too long .
" unfortunately , " said athos , " he whom we send must possess in himself alone the four qualities united . "
" but where is such a lackey to be found ? "
" not to be found ! " cried athos . " i know it well , so take grimaud . "
" take mousqueton . "
" take planchet .
planchet is brave and shrewd ; they are two qualities out of the four . "
" gentlemen , " said aramis , " the principal question is not to know which of our four lackeys is the most discreet , the most strong , the most clever , or the most brave ; the principal thing is to know which loves money the best . "
" what aramis says is very sensible , " replied athos ; " we must speculate upon the faults of people , and not upon their virtues . monsieur abbe , you are a great moralist . "
" doubtless , " said aramis , " for we not only require to be well served in order to succeed , but moreover , not to fail ; for in case of failure , heads are in question , not for our lackeys-- "
" speak lower , aramis , " said athos .
" that s wise -- not for the lackeys , " resumed aramis , " but for the master -- for the masters , we may say .
are our lackeys sufficiently devoted to us to risk their lives for us ?
no . "
" my faith , " said dartagnan . " i would almost answer for planchet . "
" well , my dear friend , add to his natural devotedness a good sum of money , and then , instead of answering for him once , answer for him twice . "
" why , good god ! you will be deceived just the same , " said athos , who was an optimist when things were concerned , and a pessimist when men were in question .
" they will promise everything for the sake of the money , and on the road fear will prevent them from acting .
once taken , they will be pressed ; when pressed , they will confess everything .
what the devil ! we are not children .
to reach england"--athos lowered his voice--"all france , covered with spies and creatures of the cardinal , must be crossed . a passport for embarkation must be obtained ; and the party must be acquainted with english in order to ask the way to london .
really , i think the thing very difficult . "
" not at all , " cried dartagnan , who was anxious the matter should be accomplished ; " on the contrary , i think it very easy .
it would be , no doubt , parbleu , if we write to lord de winter about affairs of vast importance , of the horrors of the cardinal-- "
" speak lower ! " said athos .
i will write to him , then , nearly in these terms . "
" let us see , " said athos , assuming in advance a critical look .
" monsieur and dear friend-- "
" ah , yes ! dear friend to an englishman , " interrupted athos ; " well commenced ! bravo , dartagnan !
only with that word you would be quartered instead of being broken on the wheel . "
" well , perhaps . i will say , then , monsieur , quite short . "
" you may even say , my lord , " replied athos , who stickled for propriety .
" my lord , do you remember the little goat pasture of the luxembourg ? "
" good , the luxembourg !
one might believe this is an allusion to the queen - mother !
that s ingenious , " said athos .
" well , then , we will put simply , my lord , do you remember a certain little enclosure where your life was spared ? "
for shame ! that s unworthy .
a benefit reproached is an offense committed . "
" and you will do right .
handle the musket and the sword , my dear fellow . you will come off splendidly at those two exercises ; but pass the pen over to monsieur abbe .
that s his province . " " ay , ay ! " said porthos ; " pass the pen to aramis , who writes theses in latin . "
" i ask no better , " said aramis , with that ingenious air of confidence which every poet has in himself ; " but let me be properly acquainted with the subject . i have heard here and there that this sister - in - law was a hussy . i have obtained proof of it by listening to her conversation with the cardinal . "
" lower ! sacre bleu ! " said athos .
" but , " continued aramis , " the details escape me . "
" and me also , " said porthos .
dartagnan and athos looked at each other for some time in silence .
at length athos , after serious reflection and becoming more pale than usual , made a sign of assent to dartagnan , who by it understood he was at liberty to speak .
" repudiated by her husband , " said athos .
" because she had been branded , " continued dartagnan .
" bah ! " cried porthos . " impossible !
what do you say -- that she wanted to have her brother - in - law killed ? "
" yes . "
" she was married ? " asked aramis .
" yes . "
" and her husband found out that she had a fleur - de - lis on her shoulder ? " cried porthos .
" yes . "
these three yeses had been pronounced by athos , each with a sadder intonation .
" and who has seen this fleur - de - lis ? " inquired aramis .
" dartagnan and i. or rather , to observe the chronological order , i and dartagnan , " replied athos .
" and does the husband of this frightful creature still live ? " said aramis .
" he still lives . "
" are you quite sure of it ? "
" i am he . "
there was a moment of cold silence , during which everyone was affected according to his nature .
" this time , " said athos , first breaking the silence , " dartagnan has given us an excellent program , and the letter must be written at once . "
" the devil ! you are right , athos , " said aramis ; " and it is a rather difficult matter .
the chancellor himself would be puzzled how to write such a letter , and yet the chancellor draws up an official report very readily .
never mind ! be silent , i will write . "
aramis accordingly took the quill , reflected for a few moments , wrote eight or ten lines in a charming little female hand , and then with a voice soft and slow , as if each word had been scrupulously weighed , he read the following :
" my lord , the person who writes these few lines had the honor of crossing swords with you in the little enclosure of the rue denfer .
as you have several times since declared yourself the friend of that person , he thinks it his duty to respond to that friendship by sending you important information .
twice you have nearly been the victim of a near relative , whom you believe to be your heir because you are ignorant that before she contracted a marriage in england she was already married in france .
but the third time , which is the present , you may succumb .
your relative left la rochelle for england during the night .
watch her arrival , for she has great and terrible projects .
if you require to know positively what she is capable of , read her past history on her left shoulder . "
" well , now that will do wonderfully well , " said athos . " my dear aramis , you have the pen of a secretary of state .
lord de winter will now be upon his guard if the letter should reach him ; and even if it should fall into the hands of the cardinal , we shall not be compromised .
have you the diamond ? " continued athos .
" i have what is still better .
as to athos , he remained unmoved .
" how much in that little bag ? "
" seven thousand livres , in louis of twelve francs . "
" seven thousand livres ! " cried porthos . " that poor little diamond was worth seven thousand livres ? "
i do nt suppose that our friend dartagnan has added any of his own to the amount . "
let us take some heed of the welfare of her dear buckingham .
that is the least we owe her . "
" that s true , " said athos ; " but that concerns aramis . "
" well , " replied the latter , blushing , " what must i say ? "
" oh , that s simple enough ! " replied athos . " write a second letter for that clever personage who lives at tours . "
aramis resumed his pen , reflected a little , and wrote the following lines , which he immediately submitted to the approbation of his friends . " my dear cousin . "
" ah , ah ! " said athos .
" this clever person is your relative , then ? "
" cousin - german . "
" go on , to your cousin , then ! "
aramis continued :
i will even venture to say that i am certain m. de buckingham will be prevented from setting out by some great event .
he would extinguish the sun if the sun incommoded him .
give these happy tidings to your sister , my dear cousin .
i have dreamed that the unlucky englishman was dead .
i can not recollect whether it was by steel or by poison ; only of this i am sure , i have dreamed he was dead , and you know my dreams never deceive me .
be assured , then , of seeing me soon return . "
" capital ! " cried athos ; " you are the king of poets , my dear aramis . you speak like the apocalypse , and you are as true as the gospel .
there is nothing now to do but to put the address to this letter . "
" that is easily done , " said aramis .
he folded the letter fancifully , and took up his pen and wrote :
" to mlle . michon , seamstress , tours . "
the three friends looked at one another and laughed ; they were caught .
well , as he means to enter the church at the same time as myself , he does not despair of becoming pope in his turn , or at least a cardinal . you can understand that a man who has such views will never allow himself to be taken , or if taken , will undergo martyrdom rather than speak . " " very well , " said dartagnan , " i consent to bazin with all my heart , but grant me planchet .
if your arrangements at tours are your arrangements , aramis , those of london are mine .
" in that case , " said athos , " planchet must receive seven hundred livres for going , and seven hundred livres for coming back ; and bazin , three hundred livres for going , and three hundred livres for returning -- that will reduce the sum to five thousand livres . we will each take a thousand livres to be employed as seems good , and we will leave a fund of a thousand livres under the guardianship of monsieur abbe here , for extraordinary occasions or common wants .
will that do ? "
" my dear athos , " said aramis , " you speak like nestor , who was , as everyone knows , the wisest among the greeks . "
the matter had been named to him by dartagnan , who in the first place pointed out the money to him , then the glory , and then the danger .
" i will carry the letter in the lining of my coat , " said planchet ; " and if i am taken i will swallow it . "
" well , but then you will not be able to fulfill your commission , " said dartagnan .
" you will give me a copy this evening , which i shall know by heart tomorrow . "
" now , " continued he , addressing planchet , " you have eight days to get an interview with lord de winter ; you have eight days to return -- in all sixteen days . if , on the sixteenth day after your departure , at eight oclock in the evening you are not here , no money -- even if it be but five minutes past eight . "
" then , monsieur , " said planchet , " you must buy me a watch . "
" take this , " said athos , with his usual careless generosity , giving him his own , " and be a good lad .
remember , if you talk , if you babble , if you get drunk , you risk your master s head , who has so much confidence in your fidelity , and who answers for you .
but remember , also , that if by your fault any evil happens to dartagnan , i will find you , wherever you may be , for the purpose of ripping up your belly . "
" oh , monsieur ! " said planchet , humiliated by the suspicion , and moreover , terrified at the calm air of the musketeer .
" and i , " said porthos , rolling his large eyes , " remember , i will skin you alive . "
" ah , monsieur ! "
" and i , " said aramis , with his soft , melodius voice , " remember that i will roast you at a slow fire , like a savage . "
" ah , monsieur ! "
planchet began to weep . we will not venture to say whether it was from terror created by the threats or from tenderness at seeing four friends so closely united .
dartagnan took his hand .
" see , planchet , " said he , " these gentlemen only say this out of affection for me , but at bottom they all like you . "
it was decided that planchet should set out the next day , at eight oclock in the morning , in order , as he had said , that he might during the night learn the letter by heart .
he gained just twelve hours by this engagement ; he was to be back on the sixteenth day , by eight oclock in the evening .
in the morning , as he was mounting his horse , dartagnan , who felt at the bottom of his heart a partiality for the duke , took planchet aside .
but this , planchet , is so serious and important that i have not informed my friends that i would entrust this secret to you ; and for a captain s commission i would not write it . "
" be satisfied , monsieur , " said planchet , " you shall see if confidence can be placed in me . "
mounted on an excellent horse , which he was to leave at the end of twenty leagues in order to take the post , planchet set off at a gallop , his spirits a little depressed by the triple promise made him by the musketeers , but otherwise as light - hearted as possible .
bazin set out the next day for tours , and was allowed eight days for performing his commission .
the four friends , during the period of these two absences , had , as may well be supposed , the eye on the watch , the nose to the wind , and the ear on the hark .
their days were passed in endeavoring to catch all that was said , in observing the proceeding of the cardinal , and in looking out for all the couriers who arrived .
more than once an involuntary trembling seized them when called upon for some unexpected service .
they had , besides , to look constantly to their own proper safety ; milady was a phantom which , when it had once appeared to people , did not allow them to sleep very quietly .
the four friends exchanged a joyful glance ; half of the work was done .
aramis , blushing in spite of himself , took the letter , which was in a large , coarse hand and not particular for its orthography .
" good god ! " cried he , laughing , " i quite despair of my poor michon ; she will never write like monsieur de voiture . "
" what does you mean by boor michon ? " said the swiss , who was chatting with the four friends when the letter came .
" oh , pardieu , less than nothing , " said aramis ; " a charming little seamstress , whom i love dearly and from whose hand i requested a few lines as a sort of keepsake . "
" the duvil ! " said the swiss , " if she is as great a lady as her writing is large , you are a lucky fellow , gomrade ! "
aramis read the letter , and passed it to athos .
" see what she writes to me , athos , " said he .
athos cast a glance over the epistle , and to disperse all the suspicions that might have been created , read aloud :
" my cousin , my sister and i are skillful in interpreting dreams , and even entertain great fear of them ; but of yours it may be said , i hope , every dream is an illusion .
adieu ! take care of yourself , and act so that we may from time to time hear you spoken of .
" marie michon "
" and what dream does she mean ? " asked the dragoon , who had approached during the reading .
" yez ; what s the dream ? " said the swiss .
" well , pardieu ! " said aramis , " it was only this : i had a dream , and i related it to her . "
" yez , yez , " said the swiss ; " it s simple enough to dell a dream , but i neffer dream . "
" you are very fortunate , " said athos , rising ; " i wish i could say as much ! "
" neffer , " replied the swiss , enchanted that a man like athos could envy him anything . " neffer , neffer ! "
dartagnan , seeing athos rise , did likewise , took his arm , and went out .
porthos and aramis remained behind to encounter the jokes of the dragoon and the swiss .
as to bazin , he went and lay down on a truss of straw ; and as he had more imagination than the swiss , he dreamed that aramis , having become pope , adorned his head with a cardinal s hat .
but , as we have said , bazin had not , by his fortunate return , removed more than a part of the uneasiness which weighed upon the four friends .
the days of expectation are long , and dartagnan , in particular , would have wagered that the days were forty - four hours .
he forgot the necessary slowness of navigation ; he exaggerated to himself the power of milady .
still further , his confidence in the worthy picard , at one time so great , diminished day by day .
this anxiety became so great that it even extended to aramis and porthos .
athos alone remained unmoved , as if no danger hovered over him , and as if he breathed his customary atmosphere .
on the sixteenth day , in particular , these signs were so strong in dartagnan and his two friends that they could not remain quiet in one place , and wandered about like ghosts on the road by which planchet was expected .
" really , " said athos to them , " you are not men but children , to let a woman terrify you so !
and what does it amount to , after all ?
to be imprisoned .
well , but we should be taken out of prison ; madame bonacieux was released .
why , every day in the trenches we go cheerfully to expose ourselves to worse than that -- for a bullet may break a leg , and i am convinced a surgeon would give us more pain in cutting off a thigh than an executioner in cutting off a head .
wait quietly , then ; in two hours , in four , in six hours at latest , planchet will be here . he promised to be here , and i have very great faith in planchet , who appears to me to be a very good lad . "
" but if he does not come ? " said dartagnan .
" well , if he does not come , it will be because he has been delayed , that s all .
he may have fallen from his horse , he may have cut a caper from the deck ; he may have traveled so fast against the wind as to have brought on a violent catarrh .
eh , gentlemen , let us reckon upon accidents !
life is a chaplet of little miseries which the philosopher counts with a smile .
be philosophers , as i am , gentlemen ; sit down at the table and let us drink . nothing makes the future look so bright as surveying it through a glass of chambertin . "
" that s all very well , " replied dartagnan ; " but i am tired of fearing when i open a fresh bottle that the wine may come from the cellar of milady . "
" you are very fastidious , " said athos ; " such a beautiful woman ! "
" a woman of mark ! " said porthos , with his loud laugh .
athos started , passed his hand over his brow to remove the drops of perspiration that burst forth , and rose in his turn with a nervous movement he could not repress .
he had found in m. de busigny , who , by the by , had given them a magnificent dinner , a partner worthy of his company .
they were playing together , as usual , when seven oclock sounded ; the patrol was heard passing to double the posts . at half past seven the retreat was sounded .
" we are lost , " said dartagnan , in the ear of athos .
" you mean to say we have lost , " said athos , quietly , drawing four pistoles from his pocket and throwing them upon the table .
" come , gentlemen , " said he , " they are beating the tattoo . let us to bed ! "
and athos went out of the parpaillot , followed by dartagnan .
aramis came behind , giving his arm to porthos .
aramis mumbled verses to himself , and porthos from time to time pulled a hair or two from his mustache , in sign of despair .
but all at once a shadow appeared in the darkness the outline of which was familiar to dartagnan , and a well - known voice said , " monsieur , i have brought your cloak ; it is chilly this evening . "
" planchet ! " cried dartagnan , beside himself with joy .
" planchet ! " repeated aramis and porthos .
" well , yes , planchet , to be sure , " said athos , " what is there so astonishing in that ?
he promised to be back by eight oclock , and eight is striking .
bravo , planchet , you are a lad of your word , and if ever you leave your master , i will promise you a place in my service . "
" oh , no , never , " said planchet , " i will never leave monsieur dartagnan . "
at the same time dartagnan felt that planchet slipped a note into his hand .
dartagnan felt a strong inclination to embrace planchet as he had embraced him on his departure ; but he feared lest this mark of affection , bestowed upon his lackey in the open street , might appear extraordinary to passers - by , and he restrained himself .
" i have the note , " said he to athos and to his friends .
" that s well , " said athos , " let us go home and read it . "
the note burned the hand of dartagnan . he wished to hasten their steps ; but athos took his arm and passed it under his own , and the young man was forced to regulate his pace by that of his friend .
at length they reached the tent , lit a lamp , and while planchet stood at the entrance that the four friends might not be surprised , dartagnan , with a trembling hand , broke the seal and opened the so anxiously expected letter .
it contained half a line , in a hand perfectly british , and with a conciseness as perfectly spartan :
thank you ; be easy .
dartagnan translated this for the others .
athos took the letter from the hands of dartagnan , approached the lamp , set fire to the paper , and did not let go till it was reduced to a cinder .
then , calling planchet , he said , " now , my lad , you may claim your seven hundred livres , but you did not run much risk with such a note as that . "
" i am not to blame for having tried every means to compress it , " said planchet .
" well ! " cried dartagnan , " tell us all about it . "
" dame , that s a long job , monsieur . "
" you are right , planchet , " said athos ; " besides , the tattoo has been sounded , and we should be observed if we kept a light burning much longer than the others . "
" so be it , " said dartagnan .
" go to bed , planchet , and sleep soundly . "
" my faith , monsieur ! that will be the first time i have done so for sixteen days . "
" and me , too ! " said dartagnan .
" and me , too ! " said porthos .
" and me , too ! " said aramis .
" well , if you will have the truth , and me , too ! " said athos .
49 fatality
meantime milady , drunk with passion , roaring on the deck like a lioness that has been embarked , had been tempted to throw herself into the sea that she might regain the coast , for she could not get rid of the thought that she had been insulted by dartagnan , threatened by athos , and that she had quit france without being revenged on them .
nine days after leaving the charente , pale with fatigue and vexation , milady saw only the blue coasts of finisterre appear .
she calculated that to cross this corner of france and return to the cardinal it would take her at least three days . add another day for landing , and that would make four . add these four to the nine others , that would be thirteen days lost -- thirteen days , during which so many important events might pass in london .
she reflected likewise that the cardinal would be furious at her return , and consequently would be more disposed to listen to the complaints brought against her than to the accusations she brought against others .
she allowed the vessel to pass lorient and brest without repeating her request to the captain , who , on his part , took care not to remind her of it .
milady therefore continued her voyage , and on the very day that planchet embarked at portsmouth for france , the messenger of his eminence entered the port in triumph .
all the city was agitated by an extraordinary movement . four large vessels , recently built , had just been launched . at the end of the jetty , his clothes richly laced with gold , glittering , as was customary with him , with diamonds and precious stones , his hat ornamented with a white feather which drooped upon his shoulder , buckingham was seen surrounded by a staff almost as brilliant as himself .
it was one of those rare and beautiful days in winter when england remembers that there is a sun .
the star of day , pale but nevertheless still splendid , was setting in the horizon , glorifying at once the heavens and the sea with bands of fire , and casting upon the towers and the old houses of the city a last ray of gold which made the windows sparkle like the reflection of a conflagration .
breathing that sea breeze , so much more invigorating and balsamic as the land is approached , contemplating all the power of those preparations she was commissioned to destroy , all the power of that army which she was to combat alone -- she , a woman with a few bags of gold -- milady compared herself mentally to judith , the terrible jewess , when she penetrated the camp of the assyrians and beheld the enormous mass of chariots , horses , men , and arms , which a gesture of her hand was to dissipate like a cloud of smoke .
they entered the roadstead ; but as they drew near in order to cast anchor , a little cutter , looking like a coastguard formidably armed , approached the merchant vessel and dropped into the sea a boat which directed its course to the ladder .
this boat contained an officer , a mate , and eight rowers . the officer alone went on board , where he was received with all the deference inspired by the uniform .
then the officer began to pass in review all the people , one after the other , and stopping when he came to milady , surveyed her very closely , but without addressing a single word to her .
he then returned to the captain , said a few words to him , and as if from that moment the vessel was under his command , he ordered a maneuver which the crew executed immediately .
then the vessel resumed its course , still escorted by the little cutter , which sailed side by side with it , menacing it with the mouths of its six cannon . the boat followed in the wake of the ship , a speck near the enormous mass .
during the examination of milady by the officer , as may well be imagined , milady on her part was not less scrutinizing in her glances .
but however great was the power of this woman with eyes of flame in reading the hearts of those whose secrets she wished to divine , she met this time with a countenance of such impassivity that no discovery followed her investigation .
the officer who had stopped in front of her and studied her with so much care might have been twenty - five or twenty - six years of age . he was of pale complexion , with clear blue eyes , rather deeply set ; his mouth , fine and well cut , remained motionless in its correct lines ; his chin , strongly marked , denoted that strength of will which in the ordinary britannic type denotes mostly nothing but obstinacy ; a brow a little receding , as is proper for poets , enthusiasts , and soldiers , was scarcely shaded by short thin hair which , like the beard which covered the lower part of his face , was of a beautiful deep chestnut color .
when they entered the port , it was already night .
the fog increased the darkness , and formed round the sternlights and lanterns of the jetty a circle like that which surrounds the moon when the weather threatens to become rainy .
the air they breathed was heavy , damp , and cold .
milady , that woman so courageous and firm , shivered in spite of herself .
the officer desired to have milady s packages pointed out to him , and ordered them to be placed in the boat . when this operation was complete , he invited her to descend by offering her his hand .
" who are you , sir , " asked she , " who has the kindness to trouble yourself so particularly on my account ? "
" you may perceive , madame , by my uniform , that i am an officer in the english navy , " replied the young man .
" yes , madame , it is the custom , not from gallantry but prudence , that in time of war foreigners should be conducted to particular hotels , in order that they may remain under the eye of the government until full information can be obtained about them . "
these words were pronounced with the most exact politeness and the most perfect calmness .
nevertheless , they had not the power of convincing milady .
" but i am not a foreigner , sir , " said she , with an accent as pure as ever was heard between portsmouth and manchester ; " my name is lady clarik , and this measure-- "
" this measure is general , madame ; and you will seek in vain to evade it . "
" i will follow you , then , sir . "
accepting the hand of the officer , she began the descent of the ladder , at the foot of which the boat waited .
the officer followed her . a large cloak was spread at the stern ; the officer requested her to sit down upon this cloak , and placed himself beside her .
" row ! " said he to the sailors .
the eight oars fell at once into the sea , making but a single sound , giving but a single stroke , and the boat seemed to fly over the surface of the water .
in five minutes they gained the land .
the officer leaped to the pier , and offered his hand to milady .
a carriage was in waiting .
" is this carriage for us ? " asked milady .
" yes , madame , " replied the officer .
" the hotel , then , is far away ? "
" at the other end of the town . "
" very well , " said milady ; and she resolutely entered the carriage .
the officer saw that the baggage was fastened carefully behind the carriage ; and this operation ended , he took his place beside milady , and shut the door .
immediately , without any order being given or his place of destination indicated , the coachman set off at a rapid pace , and plunged into the streets of the city .
so strange a reception naturally gave milady ample matter for reflection ; so seeing that the young officer did not seem at all disposed for conversation , she reclined in her corner of the carriage , and one after the other passed in review all the surmises which presented themselves to her mind .
at the end of a quarter of an hour , however , surprised at the length of the journey , she leaned forward toward the door to see whither she was being conducted .
houses were no longer to be seen ; trees appeared in the darkness like great black phantoms chasing one another .
milady shuddered .
" but we are no longer in the city , sir , " said she .
the young officer preserved silence .
" i beg you to understand , sir , i will go no farther unless you tell me whither you are taking me . "
this threat brought no reply .
" oh , this is too much , " cried milady . " help ! help ! "
no voice replied to hers ; the carriage continued to roll on with rapidity ; the officer seemed a statue .
milady looked at the officer with one of those terrible expressions peculiar to her countenance , and which so rarely failed of their effect ; anger made her eyes flash in the darkness .
the young man remained immovable .
milady tried to open the door in order to throw herself out .
" take care , madame , " said the young man , coolly , " you will kill yourself in jumping . "
the officer leaned forward , looked at her in his turn , and appeared surprised to see that face , just before so beautiful , distorted with passion and almost hideous .
" no violence will be offered to you , madame , and what happens to you is the result of a very simple measure which we are obliged to adopt with all who land in england . "
" then you do nt know me , sir ? "
" it is the first time i have had the honor of seeing you . "
" and on your honor , you have no cause of hatred against me ? "
" none , i swear to you . "
there was so much serenity , coolness , mildness even , in the voice of the young man , that milady felt reassured .
at length after a journey of nearly an hour , the carriage stopped before an iron gate , which closed an avenue leading to a castle severe in form , massive , and isolated .
then , as the wheels rolled over a fine gravel , milady could hear a vast roaring , which she at once recognized as the noise of the sea dashing against some steep cliff .
the carriage passed under two arched gateways , and at length stopped in a court large , dark , and square . almost immediately the door of the carriage was opened , the young man sprang lightly out and presented his hand to milady , who leaned upon it , and in her turn alighted with tolerable calmness .
" still , then , i am a prisoner , " said milady , looking around her , and bringing back her eyes with a most gracious smile to the young officer ; " but i feel assured it will not be for long , " added she . " my own conscience and your politeness , sir , are the guarantees of that . "
however flattering this compliment , the officer made no reply ; but drawing from his belt a little silver whistle , such as boatswains use in ships of war , he whistled three times , with three different modulations . immediately several men appeared , who unharnessed the smoking horses , and put the carriage into a coach house .
then the officer , with the same calm politeness , invited his prisoner to enter the house .
she , with a still - smiling countenance , took his arm , and passed with him under a low arched door , which by a vaulted passage , lighted only at the farther end , led to a stone staircase around an angle of stone . they then came to a massive door , which after the introduction into the lock of a key which the young man carried with him , turned heavily upon its hinges , and disclosed the chamber destined for milady .
with a single glance the prisoner took in the apartment in its minutest details .
in an instant all the strength of mind of this creature , though drawn from the most vigorous sources , abandoned her ; she sank into a large easy chair , with her arms crossed , her head lowered , and expecting every instant to see a judge enter to interrogate her .
but no one entered except two or three marines , who brought her trunks and packages , deposited them in a corner , and retired without speaking .
the officer superintended all these details with the same calmness milady had constantly seen in him , never pronouncing a word himself , and making himself obeyed by a gesture of his hand or a sound of his whistle .
it might have been said that between this man and his inferiors spoken language did not exist , or had become useless .
at length milady could hold out no longer ; she broke the silence .
" in the name of heaven , sir , " cried she , " what means all that is passing ?
put an end to my doubts ; i have courage enough for any danger i can foresee , for every misfortune which i understand .
" you are here in the apartment destined for you , madame .
i received orders to go and take charge of you on the sea , and to conduct you to this castle . this order i believe i have accomplished with all the exactness of a soldier , but also with the courtesy of a gentleman .
there terminates , at least to the present moment , the duty i had to fulfill toward you ; the rest concerns another person . "
" and who is that other person ? " asked milady , warmly . " can you not tell me his name ? "
at the moment a great jingling of spurs was heard on the stairs . some voices passed and faded away , and the sound of a single footstep approached the door .
" that person is here , madame , " said the officer , leaving the entrance open , and drawing himself up in an attitude of respect .
at the same time the door opened ; a man appeared on the threshold .
he was without a hat , carried a sword , and flourished a handkerchief in his hand .
milady thought she recognized this shadow in the gloom ; she supported herself with one hand upon the arm of the chair , and advanced her head as if to meet a certainty .
" yes , fair lady ! " replied lord de winter , making a bow , half courteous , half ironical ; " it is i , myself . "
" but this castle , then ? "
" is mine . "
" this chamber ? "
" is yours . "
" i am , then , your prisoner ? "
" nearly so . "
" but this is a frightful abuse of power ! "
" no high - sounding words ! let us sit down and chat quietly , as brother and sister ought to do . "
then , turning toward the door , and seeing that the young officer was waiting for his last orders , he said .
" all is well , i thank you ; now leave us alone , mr . felton . "
50 chat between brother and sister
during the time which lord de winter took to shut the door , close a shutter , and draw a chair near to his sister - in - law s fauteuil , milady , anxiously thoughtful , plunged her glance into the depths of possibility , and discovered all the plan , of which she could not even obtain a glance as long as she was ignorant into whose hands she had fallen .
she knew her brother - in - law to be a worthy gentleman , a bold hunter , an intrepid player , enterprising with women , but by no means remarkable for his skill in intrigues .
how had he discovered her arrival , and caused her to be seized ?
why did he detain her ?
athos had dropped some words which proved that the conversation she had with the cardinal had fallen into outside ears ; but she could not suppose that he had dug a countermine so promptly and so boldly .
she rather feared that her preceding operations in england might have been discovered .
buckingham might have guessed that it was she who had cut off the two studs , and avenge himself for that little treachery ; but buckingham was incapable of going to any excess against a woman , particularly if that woman was supposed to have acted from a feeling of jealousy .
this supposition appeared to her most reasonable . it seemed to her that they wanted to revenge the past , and not to anticipate the future .
at all events , she congratulated herself upon having fallen into the hands of her brother - in - law , with whom she reckoned she could deal very easily , rather than into the hands of an acknowledged and intelligent enemy .
" yes , let us chat , brother , " said she , with a kind of cheerfulness , decided as she was to draw from the conversation , in spite of all the dissimulation lord de winter could bring , the revelations of which she stood in need to regulate her future conduct .
" you have , then , decided to come to england again , " said lord de winter , " in spite of the resolutions you so often expressed in paris never to set your feet on british ground ? "
milady replied to this question by another question .
" to begin with , tell me , " said she , " how have you watched me so closely as to be aware beforehand not only of my arrival , but even of the day , the hour , and the port at which i should arrive ? "
lord de winter adopted the same tactics as milady , thinking that as his sister - in - law employed them they must be the best .
" but tell me , my dear sister , " replied he , " what makes you come to england ? "
" i come to see you , " replied milady , without knowing how much she aggravated by this reply the suspicions to which dartagnan s letter had given birth in the mind of her brother - in - law , and only desiring to gain the good will of her auditor by a falsehood .
" ah , to see me ? " said de winter , cunningly .
" to be sure , to see you .
what is there astonishing in that ? "
" and you had no other object in coming to england but to see me ? "
" no . "
" so it was for me alone you have taken the trouble to cross the channel ? "
" for you alone . "
" the deuce ! what tenderness , my sister ! "
" but am i not your nearest relative ? " demanded milady , with a tone of the most touching ingenuousness .
" and my only heir , are you not ? " said lord de winter in his turn , fixing his eyes on those of milady .
in fact , the blow was direct and severe .
the first idea that occurred to milady s mind was that she had been betrayed by kitty , and that she had recounted to the baron the selfish aversion toward himself of which she had imprudently allowed some marks to escape before her servant . she also recollected the furious and imprudent attack she had made upon dartagnan when he spared the life of her brother .
" i do not understand , my lord , " said she , in order to gain time and make her adversary speak out .
" what do you mean to say ? is there any secret meaning concealed beneath your words ? "
" oh , my god , no ! " said lord de winter , with apparent good nature . " you wish to see me , and you come to england .
i learn this desire , or rather i suspect that you feel it ; and in order to spare you all the annoyances of a nocturnal arrival in a port and all the fatigues of landing , i send one of my officers to meet you , i place a carriage at his orders , and he brings you hither to this castle , of which i am governor , whither i come every day , and where , in order to satisfy our mutual desire of seeing each other , i have prepared you a chamber .
what is there more astonishing in all that i have said to you than in what you have told me ? "
" no ; what i think astonishing is that you should expect my coming . "
" and yet that is the most simple thing in the world , my dear sister . have you not observed that the captain of your little vessel , on entering the roadstead , sent forward , in order to obtain permission to enter the port , a little boat bearing his logbook and the register of his voyagers ?
i am commandant of the port . they brought me that book . i recognized your name in it .
my heart told me what your mouth has just confirmed -- that is to say , with what view you have exposed yourself to the dangers of a sea so perilous , or at least so troublesome at this moment -- and i sent my cutter to meet you .
you know the rest . "
milady knew that lord de winter lied , and she was the more alarmed .
" my brother , " continued she , " was not that my lord buckingham whom i saw on the jetty this evening as we arrived ? "
" himself .
" my friend the cardinal ! " cried milady , seeing that on this point as on the other lord de winter seemed well instructed .
" yes . "
" well , i reply that you shall be served to the height of your wishes , and that we shall see each other every day . "
" am i , then , to remain here eternally ? " demanded milady , with a certain terror .
" do you find yourself badly lodged , sister ? demand anything you want , and i will hasten to have you furnished with it . "
" but i have neither my women nor my servants . "
" you shall have all , madame . tell me on what footing your household was established by your first husband , and although i am only your brother - in - law , i will arrange one similar . "
" my first husband ! " cried milady , looking at lord de winter with eyes almost starting from their sockets .
" yes , your french husband . i do nt speak of my brother .
if you have forgotten , as he is still living , i can write to him and he will send me information on the subject . "
a cold sweat burst from the brow of milady .
" you jest ! " said she , in a hollow voice .
" do i look so ? " asked the baron , rising and going a step backward .
" or rather you insult me , " continued she , pressing with her stiffened hands the two arms of her easy chair , and raising herself upon her wrists .
" i insult you ! " said lord de winter , with contempt . " in truth , madame , do you think that can be possible ? "
" indeed , sir , " said milady , " you must be either drunk or mad . leave the room , and send me a woman . "
" women are very indiscreet , my sister . can not i serve you as a waiting maid ? by that means all our secrets will remain in the family . "
" insolent ! " cried milady ; and as if acted upon by a spring , she bounded toward the baron , who awaited her attack with his arms crossed , but nevertheless with one hand on the hilt of his sword .
" come ! " said he . " i know you are accustomed to assassinate people ; but i warn you i shall defend myself , even against you . "
" you are right , " said milady . " you have all the appearance of being cowardly enough to lift your hand against a woman . "
" perhaps so ; and i have an excuse , for mine would not be the first hand of a man that has been placed upon you , i imagine . "
and the baron pointed , with a slow and accusing gesture , to the left shoulder of milady , which he almost touched with his finger .
oh , be assured , if the memory of my brother were not sacred to me , you should rot in a state dungeon or satisfy the curiosity of sailors at tyburn . i will be silent , but you must endure your captivity quietly .
milady listened with an attention that dilated her inflamed eyes .
if they kill you , english justice will be under an obligation to me for having saved it trouble .
ah !
what do you say of him ? could a statue of marble have been more impassive and more mute ?
he went toward the door and opened it hastily .
" call mr . felton , " said he .
" wait a minute longer , and i will introduce him to you . "
there followed between these two personages a strange silence , during which the sound of a slow and regular step was heard approaching . shortly a human form appeared in the shade of the corridor , and the young lieutenant , with whom we are already acquainted , stopped at the threshold to receive the orders of the baron .
" come in , my dear john , " said lord de winter , " come in , and shut the door . "
the young officer entered .
john felton , i trust your word ! john felton , i put faith in your loyalty ! "
" my lord , " said the young officer , summoning to his mild countenance all the hatred he could find in his heart , " my lord , i swear all shall be done as you desire . "
milady received this look like a resigned victim ; it was impossible to imagine a more submissive or a more mild expression than that which prevailed on her beautiful countenance .
lord de winter himself could scarcely recognize the tigress who , a minute before , prepared apparently for a fight .
" she is not to leave this chamber , understand , john , " continued the baron . " she is to correspond with nobody ; she is to speak to no one but you -- if you will do her the honor to address a word to her . "
" that is sufficient , my lord !
i have sworn . " " and now , madame , try to make your peace with god , for you are judged by men ! "
milady let her head sink , as if crushed by this sentence .
lord de winter went out , making a sign to felton , who followed him , shutting the door after him .
one instant after , the heavy step of a marine who served as sentinel was heard in the corridor -- his ax in his girdle and his musket on his shoulder .
51 officer
meanwhile , the cardinal looked anxiously for news from england ; but no news arrived that was not annoying and threatening .
although la rochelle was invested , however certain success might appear -- thanks to the precautions taken , and above all to the dyke , which prevented the entrance of any vessel into the besieged city -- the blockade might last a long time yet . this was a great affront to the king s army , and a great inconvenience to the cardinal , who had no longer , it is true , to embroil louis xiii with anne of austria -- for that affair was over -- but he had to adjust matters for m. de bassompierre , who was embroiled with the duc dangouleme .
as to monsieur , who had begun the siege , he left to the cardinal the task of finishing it .
the city , notwithstanding the incredible perseverance of its mayor , had attempted a sort of mutiny for a surrender ; the mayor had hanged the mutineers .
this execution quieted the ill - disposed , who resolved to allow themselves to die of hunger -- this death always appearing to them more slow and less sure than strangulation .
on their side , from time to time , the besiegers took the messengers which the rochellais sent to buckingham , or the spies which buckingham sent to the rochellais .
in one case or the other , the trial was soon over .
the cardinal pronounced the single word , " hanged ! "
the king was invited to come and see the hanging .
he came languidly , placing himself in a good situation to see all the details . this amused him sometimes a little , and made him endure the siege with patience ; but it did not prevent his getting very tired , or from talking at every moment of returning to paris -- so that if the messengers and the spies had failed , his eminence , notwithstanding all his inventiveness , would have found himself much embarrassed .
nevertheless , time passed on , and the rochellais did not surrender . the last spy that was taken was the bearer of a letter .
this letter told buckingham that the city was at an extremity ; but instead of adding , " if your succor does not arrive within fifteen days , we will surrender , " it added , quite simply , " if your succor comes not within fifteen days , we shall all be dead with hunger when it comes . "
the rochellais , then , had no hope but in buckingham .
buckingham was their messiah .
it was evident that if they one day learned positively that they must not count on buckingham , their courage would fail with their hope .
the cardinal looked , then , with great impatience for the news from england which would announce to him that buckingham would not come .
the question of carrying the city by assault , though often debated in the council of the king , had been always rejected . in the first place , la rochelle appeared impregnable . then the cardinal , whatever he said , very well knew that the horror of bloodshed in this encounter , in which frenchman would combat against frenchman , was a retrograde movement of sixty years impressed upon his policy ; and the cardinal was at that period what we now call a man of progress .
the cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear he entertained of his terrible emissary -- for he comprehended the strange qualities of this woman , sometimes a serpent , sometimes a lion .
had she betrayed him ? was she dead ?
that was what he could not know .
and yet he reckoned , and with reason , on milady . he had divined in the past of this woman terrible things which his red mantle alone could cover ; and he felt , from one cause or another , that this woman was his own , as she could look to no other but himself for a support superior to the danger which threatened her .
he resolved , then , to carry on the war alone , and to look for no success foreign to himself , but as we look for a fortunate chance .
he continued to press the raising of the famous dyke which was to starve la rochelle . meanwhile , he cast his eyes over that unfortunate city , which contained so much deep misery and so many heroic virtues , and recalling the saying of louis xi , his political predecessor , as he himself was the predecessor of robespierre , he repeated this maxim of tristan s gossip : " divide in order to reign . "
henry iv , when besieging paris , had loaves and provisions thrown over the walls . the cardinal had little notes thrown over in which he represented to the rochellais how unjust , selfish , and barbarous was the conduct of their leaders . these leaders had corn in abundance , and would not let them partake of it ; they adopted as a maxim -- for they , too , had maxims -- that it was of very little consequence that women , children , and old men should die , so long as the men who were to defend the walls remained strong and healthy .
up to that time , whether from devotedness or from want of power to act against it , this maxim , without being generally adopted , nevertheless passed from theory into practice ; but the notes did it injury .
these notes had all the effect that he who wrote them could expect , in that they induced a great number of the inhabitants to open private negotiations with the royal army .
still further , buckingham announced to the mayor that at length the great league was about to declare itself against france , and that the kingdom would be at once invaded by the english , imperial , and spanish armies .
this letter was read publicly in all parts of the city . copies were put up at the corners of the streets ; and even they who had begun to open negotiations interrupted them , being resolved to await the succor so pompously announced .
this unexpected circumstance brought back richelieu s former anxiety , and forced him in spite of himself once more to turn his eyes to the other side of the sea .
during this time , exempt from the anxiety of its only and true chief , the royal army led a joyous life , neither provisions nor money being wanting in the camp . all the corps rivaled one another in audacity and gaiety .
to take spies and hang them , to make hazardous expeditions upon the dyke or the sea , to imagine wild plans , and to execute them coolly -- such were the pastimes which made the army find these days short which were not only so long to the rochellais , a prey to famine and anxiety , but even to the cardinal , who blockaded them so closely .
sometimes when the cardinal , always on horseback , like the lowest gendarme of the army , cast a pensive glance over those works , so slowly keeping pace with his wishes , which the engineers , brought from all the corners of france , were executing under his orders , if he met a musketeer of the company of treville , he drew near and looked at him in a peculiar manner , and not recognizing in him one of our four companions , he turned his penetrating look and profound thoughts in another direction .
four of these men were our musketeers , preparing to listen to a letter one of them had just received .
this letter was so important that it made them forsake their cards and their dice on the drumhead .
the other three were occupied in opening an enormous flagon of collicure wine ; these were the lackeys of these gentlemen .
the cardinal was , as we have said , in very low spirits ; and nothing when he was in that state of mind increased his depression so much as gaiety in others .
besides , he had another strange fancy , which was always to believe that the causes of his sadness created the gaiety of others .
making a sign to la houdiniere and cahusac to stop , he alighted from his horse , and went toward these suspected merry companions , hoping , by means of the sand which deadened the sound of his steps and of the hedge which concealed his approach , to catch some words of this conversation which appeared so interesting . at ten paces from the hedge he recognized the talkative gascon ; and as he had already perceived that these men were musketeers , he did not doubt that the three others were those called the inseparables ; that is to say , athos , porthos , and aramis .
" officer ! " cried grimaud .
" you are speaking , you scoundrel ! " said athos , rising upon his elbow , and transfixing grimaud with his flaming look .
grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech , but contented himself with pointing his index finger in the direction of the hedge , announcing by this gesture the cardinal and his escort .
with a single bound the musketeers were on their feet , and saluted with respect .
the cardinal seemed furious .
" it appears that messieurs the musketeers keep guard , " said he .
" are the english expected by land , or do the musketeers consider themselves superior officers ? "
" monseigneur , " replied athos , for amid the general fright he alone had preserved the noble calmness and coolness that never forsook him , " monseigneur , the musketeers , when they are not on duty , or when their duty is over , drink and play at dice , and they are certainly superior officers to their lackeys . "
" lackeys ? " grumbled the cardinal . " lackeys who have the order to warn their masters when anyone passes are not lackeys , they are sentinels . "
" your eminence may perceive that if we had not taken this precaution , we should have been exposed to allowing you to pass without presenting you our respects or offering you our thanks for the favor you have done us in uniting us .
dartagnan , " continued athos , " you , who but lately were so anxious for such an opportunity for expressing your gratitude to monseigneur , here it is ; avail yourself of it . "
these words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm which distinguished athos in the hour of danger , and with that excessive politeness which made of him at certain moments a king more majestic than kings by birth .
dartagnan came forward and stammered out a few words of gratitude which soon expired under the gloomy looks of the cardinal .
athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely , and bowed in sign of assent .
then he resumed in his turn : " discipline , monseigneur , has , i hope , in no way been forgotten by us .
we are not on duty , and we believed that not being on duty we were at liberty to dispose of our time as we pleased .
if we are so fortunate as to have some particular duty to perform for your eminence , we are ready to obey you .
your eminence may perceive , " continued athos , knitting his brow , for this sort of investigation began to annoy him , " that we have not come out without our arms . "
and he showed the cardinal , with his finger , the four muskets piled near the drum , on which were the cards and dice .
" your eminence may believe , " added dartagnan , " that we would have come to meet you , if we could have supposed it was monseigneur coming toward us with so few attendants . "
the cardinal bit his mustache , and even his lips a little .
" do you know what you look like , all together , as you are armed and guarded by your lackeys ? " said the cardinal . " you look like four conspirators . "
" oh , as to that , monseigneur , it is true , " said athos ; " we do conspire , as your eminence might have seen the other morning . only we conspire against the rochellais . "
" ah , you gentlemen of policy ! " replied the cardinal , knitting his brow in his turn , " the secret of many unknown things might perhaps be found in your brains , if we could read them as you read that letter which you concealed as soon as you saw me coming . "
the color mounted to the face of athos , and he made a step toward his eminence .
" and if it were an interrogatory ! " replied the cardinal . " others besides you have undergone such , monsieur athos , and have replied thereto . "
" thus i have told your eminence that you had but to question us , and we are ready to reply . "
" what was that letter you were about to read , monsieur aramis , and which you so promptly concealed ? "
" a woman s letter , monseigneur . "
" ah , yes , i see , " said the cardinal ; " we must be discreet with this sort of letters ; but nevertheless , we may show them to a confessor , and you know i have taken orders . "
" monseigneur , " said athos , with a calmness the more terrible because he risked his head in making this reply , " the letter is a woman s letter , but it is neither signed marion de lorme , nor madame daiguillon . "
the cardinal became as pale as death ; lightning darted from his eyes . he turned round as if to give an order to cahusac and houdiniere .
athos saw the movement ; he made a step toward the muskets , upon which the other three friends had fixed their eyes , like men ill - disposed to allow themselves to be taken .
adieu , gentlemen ! "
and remounting his horse , which cahusac led to him , he saluted them with his hand , and rode away .
the four young men , standing and motionless , followed him with their eyes without speaking a single word until he had disappeared .
then they looked at one another .
the countenances of all gave evidence of terror , for notwithstanding the friendly adieu of his eminence , they plainly perceived that the cardinal went away with rage in his heart .
athos alone smiled , with a self - possessed , disdainful smile .
grimaud was about to reply to excuse himself .
athos lifted his finger , and grimaud was silent .
" would you have given up the letter , aramis ? " said dartagnan .
" i expected as much , " said athos ; " and that was why i threw myself between you and him .
indeed , this man is very much to blame for talking thus to other men ; one would say he had never had to do with any but women and children . "
" my dear athos , i admire you , but nevertheless we were in the wrong , after all . "
" how , in the wrong ? " said athos . " whose , then , is the air we breathe ?
do these belong to the cardinal ?
upon my honor , this man fancies the world belongs to him . there you stood , stammering , stupefied , annihilated . one might have supposed the bastille appeared before you , and that the gigantic medusa had converted you into stone .
is being in love conspiring ?
you are in love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up , and you wish to get her out of the hands of the cardinal . that s a match you are playing with his eminence ; this letter is your game .
why should you expose your game to your adversary ? that is never done .
we can find out his ! " " well , that s all very sensible , athos , " said dartagnan .
" in that case , let there be no more question of what s past , and let aramis resume the letter from his cousin where the cardinal interrupted him . "
aramis drew the letter from his pocket ; the three friends surrounded him , and the three lackeys grouped themselves again near the wine jar .
" you had only read a line or two , " said dartagnan ; " read the letter again from the commencement . "
" willingly , " said aramis .
" my dear cousin , i think i shall make up my mind to set out for bethune , where my sister has placed our little servant in the convent of the carmelites ; this poor child is quite resigned , as she knows she can not live elsewhere without the salvation of her soul being in danger .
nevertheless , if the affairs of our family are arranged , as we hope they will be , i believe she will run the risk of being damned , and will return to those she regrets , particularly as she knows they are always thinking of her .
meanwhile , she is not very wretched ; what she most desires is a letter from her intended .
i know that such viands pass with difficulty through convent gratings ; but after all , as i have given you proofs , my dear cousin , i am not unskilled in such affairs , and i will take charge of the commission .
my sister thanks you for your good and eternal remembrance .
she has experienced much anxiety ; but she is now at length a little reassured , having sent her secretary away in order that nothing may happen unexpectedly .
" adieu , my dear cousin . tell us news of yourself as often as you can ; that is to say , as often as you can with safety .
i embrace you .
" marie michon . "
" oh , what do i not owe you , aramis ? " said dartagnan .
where is bethune , athos ? "
" why , upon the frontiers of artois and of flanders . the siege once over , we shall be able to make a tour in that direction . "
" and that will not be long , it is to be hoped , " said porthos ; " for they have this morning hanged a spy who confessed that the rochellais were reduced to the leather of their shoes .
all the same , " resumed he , after having clicked his tongue against his palate , " they are brave fellows !
but what the devil are you about , aramis ? " continued athos . " why , you are squeezing that letter into your pocket ! "
" yes , " said dartagnan , " athos is right , it must be burned . and yet if we burn it , who knows whether monsieur cardinal has not a secret to interrogate ashes ? "
" he must have one , " said athos .
" what will you do with the letter , then ? " asked porthos .
" come here , grimaud , " said athos .
grimaud rose and obeyed .
grimaud smiled ; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass which athos held in his hand , he ground the paper well between his teeth and then swallowed it .
" bravo , monsieur grimaud ! " said athos ; " and now take this . that s well . we dispense with your saying grace . "
grimaud silently swallowed the glass of bordeaux wine ; but his eyes , raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation , spoke a language which , though mute , was not the less expressive .
" and now , " said athos , " unless monsieur cardinal should form the ingenious idea of ripping up grimaud , i think we may be pretty much at our ease respecting the letter . "
meantime , his eminence continued his melancholy ride , murmuring between his mustaches , " these four men must positively be mine . "
52 captivity : the first day
let us return to milady , whom a glance thrown upon the coast of france has made us lose sight of for an instant .
we shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we left her , plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection -- a dark hell at the gate of which she has almost left hope behind , because for the first time she doubts , for the first time she fears .
on two occasions her fortune has failed her , on two occasions she has found herself discovered and betrayed ; and on these two occasions it was to one fatal genius , sent doubtlessly by the lord to combat her , that she has succumbed . dartagnan has conquered her -- her , that invincible power of evil .
he has deceived her in her love , humbled her in her pride , thwarted her in her ambition ; and now he ruins her fortune , deprives her of liberty , and even threatens her life .
still more , he has lifted the corner of her mask -- that shield with which she covered herself and which rendered her so strong .
dartagnan has turned aside from buckingham , whom she hates as she hates everyone she has loved , the tempest with which richelieu threatened him in the person of the queen .
dartagnan had passed himself upon her as de wardes , for whom she had conceived one of those tigerlike fancies common to women of her character .
dartagnan knows that terrible secret which she has sworn no one shall know without dying .
all this she owes to dartagnan , without doubt . from whom can come so many disgraces heaped upon her head , if not from him ?
he alone could have transmitted to lord de winter all these frightful secrets which he has discovered , one after another , by a train of fatalities .
he knows her brother - in - law . he must have written to him .
what hatred she distills !
motionless , with her burning and fixed glances , in her solitary apartment , how well the outbursts of passion which at times escape from the depths of her chest with her respiration , accompany the sound of the surf which rises , growls , roars , and breaks itself like an eternal and powerless despair against the rocks on which is built this dark and lofty castle !
how many magnificent projects of vengeance she conceives by the light of the flashes which her tempestuous passion casts over her mind against mme . bonacieux , against buckingham , but above all against dartagnan -- projects lost in the distance of the future .
yes ; but in order to avenge herself she must be free . and to be free , a prisoner has to pierce a wall , detach bars , cut through a floor -- all undertakings which a patient and strong man may accomplish , but before which the feverish irritations of a woman must give way .
and yet , if she were a man she would attempt all this , and perhaps might succeed ; why , then , did heaven make the mistake of placing that manlike soul in that frail and delicate body ?
the first moments of her captivity were terrible ; a few convulsions of rage which she could not suppress paid her debt of feminine weakness to nature .
but by degrees she overcame the outbursts of her mad passion ; and nervous tremblings which agitated her frame disappeared , and she remained folded within herself like a fatigued serpent in repose . " go to , go to !
" no violence ; violence is the proof of weakness .
in the first place , i have never succeeded by that means . perhaps if i employed my strength against women i might perchance find them weaker than myself , and consequently conquer them ; but it is with men that i struggle , and i am but a woman to them .
let me fight like a woman , then ; my strength is in my weakness . "
then , as if to render an account to herself of the changes she could place upon her countenance , so mobile and so expressive , she made it take all expressions from that of passionate anger , which convulsed her features , to that of the most sweet , most affectionate , and most seducing smile .
then her hair assumed successively , under her skillful hands , all the undulations she thought might assist the charms of her face .
at length she murmured , satisfied with herself , " come , nothing is lost ; i am still beautiful . "
it was then nearly eight oclock in the evening .
milady perceived a bed ; she calculated that the repose of a few hours would not only refresh her head and her ideas , but still further , her complexion .
a better idea , however , came into her mind before going to bed .
she had heard something said about supper .
she had already been an hour in this apartment ; they could not long delay bringing her a repast .
a light appeared under the door ; this light announced the reappearance of her jailers .
milady , who had arisen , threw herself quickly into the armchair , her head thrown back , her beautiful hair unbound and disheveled , her bosom half bare beneath her crumpled lace , one hand on her heart , and the other hanging down .
the bolts were drawn ; the door groaned upon its hinges . steps sounded in the chamber , and drew near .
" place that table there , " said a voice which the prisoner recognized as that of felton .
the order was executed .
" you will bring lights , and relieve the sentinel , " continued felton .
and this double order which the young lieutenant gave to the same individuals proved to milady that her servants were the same men as her guards ; that is to say , soldiers .
felton s orders were , for the rest , executed with a silent rapidity that gave a good idea of the way in which he maintained discipline .
at length felton , who had not yet looked at milady , turned toward her .
" ah , ah ! " said he , " she is asleep ; that s well . when she wakes she can sup . "
and he made some steps toward the door .
" but , my lieutenant , " said a soldier , less stoical than his chief , and who had approached milady , " this woman is not asleep . "
" what , not asleep ! " said felton ; " what is she doing , then ? "
" she has fainted . her face is very pale , and i have listened in vain ; i do not hear her breathe . "
" you are right , " said felton , after having looked at milady from the spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her . " go and tell lord de winter that his prisoner has fainted -- for this event not having been foreseen , i do nt know what to do . "
the soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer . felton sat down upon an armchair which happened to be near the door , and waited without speaking a word , without making a gesture .
at this sigh felton turned round .
" ah , you are awake , madame , " he said ; " then i have nothing more to do here .
if you want anything you can ring . "
" oh , my god , my god ! how i have suffered ! " said milady , in that harmonious voice which , like that of the ancient enchantresses , charmed all whom she wished to destroy .
and she assumed , upon sitting up in the armchair , a still more graceful and abandoned position than when she reclined .
felton arose .
" you will be served , thus , madame , three times a day , " said he . " in the morning at nine oclock , in the day at one oclock , and in the evening at eight .
if that does not suit you , you can point out what other hours you prefer , and in this respect your wishes will be complied with . "
" but am i to remain always alone in this vast and dismal chamber ? " asked milady .
" a woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for , who will be tomorrow at the castle , and will return as often as you desire her presence . "
" i thank you , sir , " replied the prisoner , humbly .
felton made a slight bow , and directed his steps toward the door .
at the moment he was about to go out , lord de winter appeared in the corridor , followed by the soldier who had been sent to inform him of the swoon of milady .
he held a vial of salts in his hand .
" well , what is it -- what is going on here ? " said he , in a jeering voice , on seeing the prisoner sitting up and felton about to go out .
" is this corpse come to life already ?
felton , my lad , did you not perceive that you were taken for a novice , and that the first act was being performed of a comedy of which we shall doubtless have the pleasure of following out all the developments ? "
" i thought so , my lord , " said felton ; " but as the prisoner is a woman , after all , i wish to pay her the attention that every man of gentle birth owes to a woman , if not on her account , at least on my own . "
milady shuddered through her whole system .
these words of felton s passed like ice through her veins .
" so , " replied de winter , laughing , " that beautiful hair so skillfully disheveled , that white skin , and that languishing look , have not yet seduced you , you heart of stone ? "
" no , my lord , " replied the impassive young man ; " your lordship may be assured that it requires more than the tricks and coquetry of a woman to corrupt me . "
" in that case , my brave lieutenant , let us leave milady to find out something else , and go to supper ; but be easy ! she has a fruitful imagination , and the second act of the comedy will not delay its steps after the first . "
and at these words lord de winter passed his arm through that of felton , and led him out , laughing .
" oh , i will be a match for you ! " murmured milady , between her teeth ; " be assured of that , you poor spoiled monk , you poor converted soldier , who has cut his uniform out of a monk s frock ! "
" by the way , " resumed de winter , stopping at the threshold of the door , " you must not , milady , let this check take away your appetite .
taste that fowl and those fish . on my honor , they are not poisoned .
i have a very good cook , and he is not to be my heir ; i have full and perfect confidence in him .
do as i do .
adieu , dear sister , till your next swoon ! "
this was all that milady could endure . her hands clutched her armchair ; she ground her teeth inwardly ; her eyes followed the motion of the door as it closed behind lord de winter and felton , and the moment she was alone a fresh fit of despair seized her . she cast her eyes upon the table , saw the glittering of a knife , rushed toward it and clutched it ; but her disappointment was cruel . the blade was round , and of flexible silver .
if i had listened to you , the knife would have been pointed and of steel . then no more of felton ; she would have cut your throat , and after that everybody else s .
see , john , see how well she knows how to handle a knife . "
in fact , milady still held the harmless weapon in her clenched hand ; but these last words , this supreme insult , relaxed her hands , her strength , and even her will .
the knife fell to the ground .
" you were right , my lord , " said felton , with a tone of profound disgust which sounded to the very bottom of the heart of milady , " you were right , my lord , and i was wrong . "
and both again left the room .
but this time milady lent a more attentive ear than the first , and she heard their steps die away in the distance of the corridor .
" i am lost , " murmured she ; " i am lost ! i am in the power of men upon whom i can have no more influence than upon statues of bronze or granite ; they know me by heart , and are steeled against all my weapons .
it is , however , impossible that this should end as they have decreed ! "
in fact , as this last reflection indicated -- this instinctive return to hope -- sentiments of weakness or fear did not dwell long in her ardent spirit .
milady sat down to table , ate from several dishes , drank a little spanish wine , and felt all her resolution return .
before she went to bed she had pondered , analyzed , turned on all sides , examined on all points , the words , the steps , the gestures , the signs , and even the silence of her interlocutors ; and of this profound , skillful , and anxious study the result was that felton , everything considered , appeared the more vulnerable of her two persecutors .
one expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner : " if i had listened to you , " lord de winter had said to felton .
felton , then , had spoken in her favor , since lord de winter had not been willing to listen to him .
" weak or strong , " repeated milady , " that man has , then , a spark of pity in his soul ; of that spark i will make a flame that shall devour him .
as to the other , he knows me , he fears me , and knows what he has to expect of me if ever i escape from his hands . it is useless , then , to attempt anything with him .
but felton -- that s another thing . he is a young , ingenuous , pure man who seems virtuous ; him there are means of destroying . "
53 captivity : the second day
she slept as a prisoner sleeps , rocked by his first hope .
in the morning , when they entered her chamber she was still in bed .
felton remained in the corridor . he brought with him the woman of whom he had spoken the evening before , and who had just arrived ; this woman entered , and approaching milady s bed , offered her services .
milady was habitually pale ; her complexion might therefore deceive a person who saw her for the first time .
" i am in a fever , " said she ; " i have not slept a single instant during all this long night . i suffer horribly . are you likely to be more humane to me than others were yesterday ?
" would you like to have a physician called ? " said the woman .
felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word .
" what could be the good of that ? these gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was a comedy ; it would be just the same today , no doubt -- for since yesterday evening they have had plenty of time to send for a doctor . "
i know that i suffer , that s all . give me anything you like , it is of little consequence . "
" go and fetch lord de winter , " said felton , tired of these eternal complaints .
" oh , no , no ! " cried milady ; " no , sir , do not call him , i conjure you . i am well , i want nothing ; do not call him . "
she gave so much vehemence , such magnetic eloquence to this exclamation , that felton in spite of himself advanced some steps into the room .
" he has come ! " thought milady .
" meanwhile , madame , if you really suffer , " said felton , " a physician shall be sent for ; and if you deceive us -- well , it will be the worse for you . but at least we shall not have to reproach ourselves with anything . "
milady made no reply , but turning her beautiful head round upon her pillow , she burst into tears , and uttered heartbreaking sobs .
felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness ; then , seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged , he went out .
the woman followed him , and lord de winter did not appear .
" i fancy i begin to see my way , " murmured milady , with a savage joy , burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybody who might be watching her this burst of inward satisfaction .
two hours passed away .
" now it is time that the malady should be over , " said she ; " let me rise , and obtain some success this very day . i have but ten days , and this evening two of them will be gone . "
in the morning , when they entered milady s chamber they had brought her breakfast . now , she thought , they could not long delay coming to clear the table , and that felton would then reappear .
milady was not deceived .
felton reappeared , and without observing whether milady had or had not touched her repast , made a sign that the table should be carried out of the room , it having been brought in ready spread .
felton remained behind ; he held a book in his hand .
milady , reclining in an armchair near the chimney , beautiful , pale , and resigned , looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom .
felton approached her , and said , " lord de winter , who is a catholic , like yourself , madame , thinking that the deprivation of the rites and ceremonies of your church might be painful to you , has consented that you should read every day the ordinary of your mass ; and here is a book which contains the ritual . "
by that plain arrangement of the hair , by that costume of extreme simplicity , by the brow polished like marble and as hard and impenetrable , she recognized one of those gloomy puritans she had so often met , not only in the court of king james , but in that of the king of france , where , in spite of the remembrance of the st . bartholomew , they sometimes came to seek refuge .
she then had one of those sudden inspirations which only people of genius receive in great crises , in supreme moments which are to decide their fortunes or their lives .
those two words , your mass , and a simple glance cast upon felton , revealed to her all the importance of the reply she was about to make ; but with that rapidity of intelligence which was peculiar to her , this reply , ready arranged , presented itself to her lips :
" i ? " said she , with an accent of disdain in unison with that which she had remarked in the voice of the young officer , " i , sir ? my mass ?
lord de winter , the corrupted catholic , knows very well that i am not of his religion , and this is a snare he wishes to lay for me ! "
" and of what religion are you , then , madame ? " asked felton , with an astonishment which in spite of the empire he held over himself he could not entirely conceal .
" i will tell it , " cried milady , with a feigned exultation , " on the day when i shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith . "
the look of felton revealed to milady the full extent of the space she had opened for herself by this single word .
the young officer , however , remained mute and motionless ; his look alone had spoken .
felton made no reply , took the book with the same appearance of repugnance which he had before manifested , and retired pensively .
lord de winter came toward five oclock in the evening . milady had had time , during the whole day , to trace her plan of conduct . she received him like a woman who had already recovered all her advantages .
" it appears , " said the baron , seating himself in the armchair opposite that occupied by milady , and stretching out his legs carelessly upon the hearth , " it appears we have made a little apostasy ! "
" what do you mean , sir ! "
" i mean to say that since we last met you have changed your religion . you have not by chance married a protestant for a third husband , have you ? "
" explain yourself , my lord , " replied the prisoner , with majesty ; " for though i hear your words , i declare i do not understand them . "
" then you have no religion at all ; i like that best , " replied lord de winter , laughing .
" certainly that is most in accord with your own principles , " replied milady , frigidly .
" oh , i confess it is all the same to me . "
" oh , you need not avow this religious indifference , my lord ; your debaucheries and crimes would vouch for it . "
" what , you talk of debaucheries , madame messalina , lady macbeth !
either i misunderstand you or you are very shameless ! "
" you only speak thus because you are overheard , " coolly replied milady ; " and you wish to interest your jailers and your hangmen against me . "
" my jailers and my hangmen !
heyday , madame ! you are taking a poetical tone , and the comedy of yesterday turns to a tragedy this evening .
as to the rest , in eight days you will be where you ought to be , and my task will be completed . "
" infamous task ! impious task ! " cried milady , with the exultation of a victim who provokes his judge .
" my word , " said de winter , rising , " i think the hussy is going mad !
come , come , calm yourself , madame puritan , or i ll remove you to a dungeon .
it s my spanish wine that has got into your head , is it not ? but never mind ; that sort of intoxication is not dangerous , and will have no bad effects . "
and lord de winter retired swearing , which at that period was a very knightly habit .
felton was indeed behind the door , and had not lost one word of this scene .
milady had guessed aright .
two hours passed away . milady s supper was brought in , and she was found deeply engaged in saying her prayers aloud -- prayers which she had learned of an old servant of her second husband , a most austere puritan .
she appeared to be in ecstasy , and did not pay the least attention to what was going on around her .
felton made a sign that she should not be disturbed ; and when all was arranged , he went out quietly with the soldiers .
milady knew she might be watched , so she continued her prayers to the end ; and it appeared to her that the soldier who was on duty at her door did not march with the same step , and seemed to listen .
for the moment she wished nothing better . she arose , came to the table , ate but little , and drank only water .
an hour after , her table was cleared ; but milady remarked that this time felton did not accompany the soldiers .
he feared , then , to see her too often .
she turned toward the wall to smile -- for there was in this smile such an expression of triumph that this smile alone would have betrayed her .
she allowed , therefore , half an hour to pass away ; and as at that moment all was silence in the old castle , as nothing was heard but the eternal murmur of the waves -- that immense breaking of the ocean -- with her pure , harmonious , and powerful voice , she began the first couplet of the psalm then in great favor with the puritans :
" thou leavest thy servants , lord , to see if they be strong ; but soon thou dost afford thy hand to lead them on . "
these verses were not excellent -- very far from it ; but as it is well known , the puritans did not pique themselves upon their poetry .
while singing , milady listened . the soldier on guard at her door stopped , as if he had been changed into stone .
milady was then able to judge of the effect she had produced .
then she continued her singing with inexpressible fervor and feeling . it appeared to her that the sounds spread to a distance beneath the vaulted roofs , and carried with them a magic charm to soften the hearts of her jailers .
it however likewise appeared that the soldier on duty -- a zealous catholic , no doubt -- shook off the charm , for through the door he called : " hold your tongue , madame !
your song is as dismal as a  de profundis  ; and if besides the pleasure of being in garrison here , we must hear such things as these , no mortal can hold out . "
" silence ! " then exclaimed another stern voice which milady recognized as that of felton . " what are you meddling with , stupid ?
did anybody order you to prevent that woman from singing ?
no .
you were told to guard her -- to fire at her if she attempted to fly .
guard her ! if she flies , kill her ; but do nt exceed your orders . "
" for all my tears , my cares , my exile , and my chains , i have my youth , my prayers , and god , who counts my pains . "
her voice , of immense power and sublime expression , gave to the rude , unpolished poetry of these psalms a magic and an effect which the most exalted puritans rarely found in the songs of their brethren , and which they were forced to ornament with all the resources of their imagination . felton believed he heard the singing of the angel who consoled the three hebrews in the furnace .
" one day our doors will ope , with god come our desire ; and if betrays that hope , to death we can aspire . "
this verse , into which the terrible enchantress threw her whole soul , completed the trouble which had seized the heart of the young officer . he opened the door quickly ; and milady saw him appear , pale as usual , but with his eye inflamed and almost wild .
" why do you sing thus , and with such a voice ? " said he .
" your pardon , sir , " said milady , with mildness . " i forgot that my songs are out of place in this castle .
i have perhaps offended you in your creed ; but it was without wishing to do so , i swear . pardon me , then , a fault which is perhaps great , but which certainly was involuntary . "
" yes , yes , " said he ; " you disturb , you agitate the people who live in the castle . "
the poor , senseless young man was not aware of the incoherence of his words , while milady was reading with her lynx s eyes the very depths of his heart .
" i will be silent , then , " said milady , casting down her eyes with all the sweetness she could give to her voice , with all the resignation she could impress upon her manner .
" no , no , madame , " said felton , " only do not sing so loud , particularly at night . "
and at these words felton , feeling that he could not long maintain his severity toward his prisoner , rushed out of the room .
" you have done right , lieutenant , " said the soldier . " such songs disturb the mind ; and yet we become accustomed to them , her voice is so beautiful . "
54 captivity : the third day
felton had fallen ; but there was still another step to be taken . he must be retained , or rather he must be left quite alone ; and milady but obscurely perceived the means which could lead to this result .
still more must be done . he must be made to speak , in order that he might be spoken to -- for milady very well knew that her greatest seduction was in her voice , which so skillfully ran over the whole gamut of tones from human speech to language celestial .
yet in spite of all this seduction milady might fail -- for felton was forewarned , and that against the least chance .
from that moment she watched all his actions , all his words , from the simplest glance of his eyes to his gestures -- even to a breath that could be interpreted as a sigh .
in short , she studied everything , as a skillful comedian does to whom a new part has been assigned in a line to which he is not accustomed .
face to face with lord de winter her plan of conduct was more easy . she had laid that down the preceding evening .
to remain silent and dignified in his presence ; from time to time to irritate him by affected disdain , by a contemptuous word ; to provoke him to threats and violence which would produce a contrast with her own resignation -- such was her plan .
felton would see all ; perhaps he would say nothing , but he would see .
in the morning , felton came as usual ; but milady allowed him to preside over all the preparations for breakfast without addressing a word to him .
toward midday , lord de winter entered .
it was a tolerably fine winter s day , and a ray of that pale english sun which lights but does not warm came through the bars of her prison .
milady was looking out at the window , and pretended not to hear the door as it opened .
patience , patience !
in four days  time the shore will be beneath your feet , the sea will be open to you -- more open than will perhaps be agreeable to you , for in four days england will be relieved of you . "
milady folded her hands , and raising her fine eyes toward heaven , " lord , lord , " said she , with an angelic meekness of gesture and tone , " pardon this man , as i myself pardon him . "
then she threw herself upon her knees , and began to pray .
" my god , my god ! " said she , " thou knowest in what holy cause i suffer ; give me , then , strength to suffer . "
the door opened gently ; the beautiful supplicant pretended not to hear the noise , and in a voice broken by tears , she continued :
" god of vengeance !
god of goodness ! wilt thou allow the frightful projects of this man to be accomplished ? "
then only she pretended to hear the sound of felton s steps , and rising quick as thought , she blushed , as if ashamed of being surprised on her knees .
" i do not like to disturb those who pray , madame , " said felton , seriously ; " do not disturb yourself on my account , i beseech you . "
" how do you know i was praying , sir ? " said milady , in a voice broken by sobs . " you were deceived , sir ; i was not praying . "
" do you think , then , madame , " replied felton , in the same serious voice , but with a milder tone , " do you think i assume the right of preventing a creature from prostrating herself before her creator ?
god forbid !
besides , repentance becomes the guilty ; whatever crimes they may have committed , for me the guilty are sacred at the feet of god ! "
" guilty ? i ? " said milady , with a smile which might have disarmed the angel of the last judgment . " guilty ?
oh , my god , thou knowest whether i am guilty !
say i am condemned , sir , if you please ; but you know that god , who loves martyrs , sometimes permits the innocent to be condemned . "
" oh , you are a just man ! " cried milady , throwing herself at his feet . " i can hold out no longer , for i fear i shall be wanting in strength at the moment when i shall be forced to undergo the struggle , and confess my faith . listen , then , to the supplication of a despairing woman .
you are abused , sir ; but that is not the question . i only ask you one favor ; and if you grant it me , i will bless you in this world and in the next . "
" speak to the master , madame , " said felton ; " happily i am neither charged with the power of pardoning nor punishing . it is upon one higher placed than i am that god has laid this responsibility . "
" to you -- no , to you alone !
listen to me , rather than add to my destruction , rather than add to my ignominy ! "
" if you have merited this shame , madame , if you have incurred this ignominy , you must submit to it as an offering to god . "
" what do you say ?
oh , you do not understand me !
when i speak of ignominy , you think i speak of some chastisement , of imprisonment or death . would to heaven !
of what consequence to me is imprisonment or death ? "
" it is i who no longer understand you , madame , " said felton .
" or , rather , who pretend not to understand me , sir ! " replied the prisoner , with a smile of incredulity .
" no , madame , on the honor of a soldier , on the faith of a christian . "
" what , you are ignorant of lord de winter s designs upon me ? "
" i am . "
" impossible ; you are his confidant ! "
" i never lie , madame . "
" oh , he conceals them too little for you not to divine them . "
" i seek to divine nothing , madame ; i wait till i am confided in , and apart from that which lord de winter has said to me before you , he has confided nothing to me . "
" why , then , " cried milady , with an incredible tone of truthfulness , " you are not his accomplice ; you do not know that he destines me to a disgrace which all the punishments of the world can not equal in horror ? "
" you are deceived , madame , " said felton , blushing ; " lord de winter is not capable of such a crime . "
" good , " said milady to herself ; " without thinking what it is , he calls it a crime ! "
then aloud , " the friend of that wretch is capable of everything . "
" whom do you call  that wretch  ? " asked felton .
" are there , then , in england two men to whom such an epithet can be applied ? "
" you mean george villiers ? " asked felton , whose looks became excited .
" whom pagans and unbelieving gentiles call duke of buckingham , " replied milady . " i could not have thought that there was an englishman in all england who would have required so long an explanation to make him understand of whom i was speaking . "
" the hand of the lord is stretched over him , " said felton ; " he will not escape the chastisement he deserves . "
felton only expressed , with regard to the duke , the feeling of execration which all the english had declared toward him whom the catholics themselves called the extortioner , the pillager , the debauchee , and whom the puritans styled simply satan .
" oh , my god , my god ! " cried milady ; " when i supplicate thee to pour upon this man the chastisement which is his due , thou knowest it is not my own vengeance i pursue , but the deliverance of a whole nation that i implore ! "
" do you know him , then ? " asked felton .
" at length he interrogates me ! " said milady to herself , at the height of joy at having obtained so quickly such a great result . " oh , know him ?
" sir , " cried she , " be kind , be clement , listen to my prayer !
" to kill yourself ? " cried felton , with terror , forgetting to withdraw his hands from the hands of the prisoner , " to kill yourself ? "
" i have told , sir , " murmured milady , lowering her voice , and allowing herself to sink overpowered to the ground ; " i have told my secret ! he knows all ! my god , i am lost ! "
felton remained standing , motionless and undecided .
" he still doubts , " thought milady ; " i have not been earnest enough . "
someone was heard in the corridor ; milady recognized the step of lord de winter .
felton recognized it also , and made a step toward the door .
milady sprang toward him .
" oh , not a word , " said she in a concentrated voice , " not a word of all that i have said to you to this man , or i am lost , and it would be you -- you-- "
then as the steps drew near , she became silent for fear of being heard , applying , with a gesture of infinite terror , her beautiful hand to felton s mouth .
felton gently repulsed milady , and she sank into a chair .
lord de winter passed before the door without stopping , and they heard the noise of his footsteps soon die away .
felton , as pale as death , remained some instants with his ear bent and listening ; then , when the sound was quite extinct , he breathed like a man awaking from a dream , and rushed out of the apartment .
" ah ! " said milady , listening in her turn to the noise of felton s steps , which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of lord de winter ; " at length you are mine ! "
then her brow darkened .
" if he tells the baron , " said she , " i am lost -- for the baron , who knows very well that i shall not kill myself , will place me before him with a knife in my hand , and he will discover that all this despair is but acted . "
she placed herself before the glass , and regarded herself attentively ; never had she appeared more beautiful .
" oh , yes , " said she , smiling , " but we wo nt tell him ! "
in the evening lord de winter accompanied the supper .
" sir , " said milady , " is your presence an indispensable accessory of my captivity ? could you not spare me the increase of torture which your visits cause me ? "
milady trembled ; she thought felton had told all . perhaps never in her life had this woman , who had experienced so many opposite and powerful emotions , felt her heart beat so violently .
she was seated . lord de winter took a chair , drew it toward her , and sat down close beside her . then taking a paper out of his pocket , he unfolded it slowly .
" here , " said he , " i want to show you the kind of passport which i have drawn up , and which will serve you henceforward as the rule of order in the life i consent to leave you . "
" if you have any preference you can point it out to me ; and if it be not within a thousand leagues of london , attention will be paid to your wishes . i will begin again , then :
"  order to conduct to -- the person named charlotte backson , branded by the justice of the kingdom of france , but liberated after chastisement . she is to dwell in this place without ever going more than three leagues from it .
in case of any attempt to escape , the penalty of death is to be applied .
she will receive five shillings per day for lodging and food  " .
" that order does not concern me , " replied milady , coldly , " since it bears another name than mine . "
" a name ?
have you a name , then ? "
" i bear that of your brother . "
" ay , but you are mistaken . my brother is only your second husband ; and your first is still living .
tell me his name , and i will put it in the place of the name of charlotte backson .
no ? you will not ? you are silent ?
well , then you must be registered as charlotte backson . "
everything in her mind was lost for an instant ; when all at once she perceived that no signature was attached to the order .
the joy she felt at this discovery was so great she could not conceal it .
" yes , yes , " said lord de winter , who perceived what was passing in her mind ; " yes , you look for the signature , and you say to yourself :  all is not lost , for that order is not signed . it is only shown to me to terrify me , that s all . 
you are mistaken . tomorrow this order will be sent to the duke of buckingham . the day after tomorrow it will return signed by his hand and marked with his seal ; and four - and - twenty hours afterward i will answer for its being carried into execution .
adieu , madame . that is all i had to say to you . "
" and i reply to you , sir , that this abuse of power , this exile under a fictitious name , are infamous ! "
" would you like better to be hanged in your true name , milady ?
milady made no reply , but became as pale as a corpse .
" oh , i see you prefer peregrination .
that s well madame ; and there is an old proverb that says ,  traveling trains youth . 
my faith ! you are not wrong after all , and life is sweet .
that s the reason why i take such care you shall not deprive me of mine .
there only remains , then , the question of the five shillings to be settled . you think me rather parsimonious , do nt you ? that s because i do nt care to leave you the means of corrupting your jailers .
besides , you will always have your charms left to seduce them with .
employ them , if your check with regard to felton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind . "
" felton has not told him , " said milady to herself . " nothing is lost , then . "
" and now , madame , till i see you again !
tomorrow i will come and announce to you the departure of my messenger . "
lord de winter rose , saluted her ironically , and went out .
she had still four days before her . four days would quite suffice to complete the seduction of felton .
in that case felton would escape her -- for in order to secure success , the magic of a continuous seduction was necessary .
then , as she had done the evening before , she fell on her knees and repeated her prayers aloud .
as on the evening before , the soldier stopped his march to listen to her .
soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel , which came from the end of the corridor and stopped before her door .
" it is he , " said she .
and she began the same religious chant which had so strongly excited felton the evening before .
but although her voice -- sweet , full , and sonorous -- vibrated as harmoniously and as affectingly as ever , the door remained shut .
however , a few instants after she had finished her religious song , milady thought she heard a profound sigh . then the same steps she had heard approach slowly withdrew , as if with regret .
55 captivity : the fourth day
the next day , when felton entered milady s apartment he found her standing , mounted upon a chair , holding in her hands a cord made by means of torn cambric handkerchiefs , twisted into a kind of rope one with another , and tied at the ends . at the noise felton made in entering , milady leaped lightly to the ground , and tried to conceal behind her the improvised cord she held in her hand .
the young man was more pale than usual , and his eyes , reddened by want of sleep , denoted that he had passed a feverish night .
nevertheless , his brow was armed with a severity more austere than ever .
felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of the apartment before which he had found milady standing in the armchair in which she was now seated , and over her head he perceived a gilt - headed screw , fixed in the wall for the purpose of hanging up clothes or weapons .
he started , and the prisoner saw that start -- for though her eyes were cast down , nothing escaped her .
" what were you doing on that armchair ? " asked he .
" of what consequence ? " replied milady .
" but , " replied felton , " i wish to know . "
" do not question me , " said the prisoner ; " you know that we who are true christians are forbidden to lie . "
" well , then , " said felton , " i will tell you what you were doing , or rather what you meant to do ; you were going to complete the fatal project you cherish in your mind . remember , madame , if our god forbids falsehood , he much more severely condemns suicide . "
" when god sees one of his creatures persecuted unjustly , placed between suicide and dishonor , believe me , sir , " replied milady , in a tone of deep conviction , " god pardons suicide , for then suicide becomes martyrdom . "
besides , of what importance to you is the life or death of a condemned wretch ? you are only responsible for my body , is it not so ?
" what have i , then , done to you , " said felton , much agitated , " that you should load me with such a responsibility before god and before men ?
in a few days you will be away from this place ; your life , madame , will then no longer be under my care , and , " added he , with a sigh , " then you can do what you will with it . "
" so , " cried milady , as if she could not resist giving utterance to a holy indignation , " you , a pious man , you who are called a just man , you ask but one thing -- and that is that you may not be inculpated , annoyed , by my death ! "
" it is my duty to watch over your life , madame , and i will watch . "
" i am a soldier , madame , and fulfill the orders i have received . "
" but i repeat it again to you , " replied felton , in great emotion , " no danger threatens you ; i will answer for lord de winter as for myself . "
" dunce , " cried milady , " dunce ! who dares to answer for another man , when the wisest , when those most after god s own heart , hesitate to answer for themselves , and who ranges himself on the side of the strongest and the most fortunate , to crush the weakest and the most unfortunate . "
" impossible , madame , impossible , " murmured felton , who felt to the bottom of his heart the justness of this argument . " a prisoner , you will not recover your liberty through me ; living , you will not lose your life through me . "
" yes , " cried milady , " but i shall lose that which is much dearer to me than life , i shall lose my honor , felton ; and it is you , you whom i make responsible , before god and before men , for my shame and my infamy . "
this time felton , immovable as he was , or appeared to be , could not resist the secret influence which had already taken possession of him . to see this woman , so beautiful , fair as the brightest vision , to see her by turns overcome with grief and threatening ; to resist at once the ascendancy of grief and beauty -- it was too much for a visionary ; it was too much for a brain weakened by the ardent dreams of an ecstatic faith ; it was too much for a heart furrowed by the love of heaven that burns , by the hatred of men that devours . milady saw the trouble .
she felt by intuition the flame of the opposing passions which burned with the blood in the veins of the young fanatic . as a skillful general , seeing the enemy ready to surrender , marches toward him with a cry of victory , she rose , beautiful as an antique priestess , inspired like a christian virgin , her arms extended , her throat uncovered , her hair disheveled , holding with one hand her robe modestly drawn over her breast , her look illumined by that fire which had already created such disorder in the veins of the young puritan , and went toward him , crying out with a vehement air , and in her melodious voice , to which on this occasion she communicated a terrible energy :
thy god shall teach thee to repent !
from th  abyss he ll give ear to my moan . "
felton stood before this strange apparition like one petrified .
" do you not know me , felton ?
i am neither an angel nor a demon ; i am a daughter of earth , i am a sister of thy faith , that is all . "
" yes , yes ! " said felton , " i doubted , but now i believe . "
" you believe , and still you are an accomplice of that child of belial who is called lord de winter !
you believe , and yet you leave me in the hands of mine enemies , of the enemy of england , of the enemy of god !
you believe , and yet you deliver me up to him who fills and defiles the world with his heresies and debaucheries -- to that infamous sardanapalus whom the blind call the duke of buckingham , and whom believers name antichrist ! "
" i deliver you up to buckingham ? i ? what mean you by that ? "
" they have eyes , " cried milady , " but they see not ; ears have they , but they hear not . "
" yes , yes ! " said felton , passing his hands over his brow , covered with sweat , as if to remove his last doubt . " yes , i recognize the voice which speaks to me in my dreams ; yes , i recognize the features of the angel who appears to me every night , crying to my soul , which can not sleep :  strike , save england , save thyself -- for thou wilt die without having appeased god ! 
speak , speak ! " cried felton , " i can understand you now . "
a flash of terrible joy , but rapid as thought , gleamed from the eyes of milady .
however fugitive this homicide flash , felton saw it , and started as if its light had revealed the abysses of this woman s heart .
he recalled , all at once , the warnings of lord de winter , the seductions of milady , her first attempts after her arrival . he drew back a step , and hung down his head , without , however , ceasing to look at her , as if , fascinated by this strange creature , he could not detach his eyes from her eyes .
milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of this hesitation .
under her apparent emotions her icy coolness never abandoned her .
before felton replied , and before she should be forced to resume this conversation , so difficult to be sustained in the same exalted tone , she let her hands fall ; and as if the weakness of the woman overpowered the enthusiasm of the inspired fanatic , she said : " but no , it is not for me to be the judith to deliver bethulia from this holofernes .
the sword of the eternal is too heavy for my arm .
allow me , then , to avoid dishonor by death ; let me take refuge in martyrdom .
i do not ask you for liberty , as a guilty one would , nor for vengeance , as would a pagan .
let me die ; that is all .
i supplicate you , i implore you on my knees -- let me die , and my last sigh shall be a blessing for my preserver . "
hearing that voice , so sweet and suppliant , seeing that look , so timid and downcast , felton reproached himself .
by degrees the enchantress had clothed herself with that magic adornment which she assumed and threw aside at will ; that is to say , beauty , meekness , and tears -- and above all , the irresistible attraction of mystical voluptuousness , the most devouring of all voluptuousness .
" alas ! " said felton , " i can do but one thing , which is to pity you if you prove to me you are a victim !
but lord de winter makes cruel accusations against you .
you are a christian ; you are my sister in religion . i feel myself drawn toward you -- i , who have never loved anyone but my benefactor -- i who have met with nothing but traitors and impious men .
but you , madame , so beautiful in reality , you , so pure in appearance , must have committed great iniquities for lord de winter to pursue you thus . "
" they have eyes , " repeated milady , with an accent of indescribable grief , " but they see not ; ears have they , but they hear not . "
" but , " cried the young officer , " speak , then , speak ! "
" confide my shame to you , " cried milady , with the blush of modesty upon her countenance , " for often the crime of one becomes the shame of another -- confide my shame to you , a man , and i a woman ?
oh , " continued she , placing her hand modestly over her beautiful eyes , " never ! never!--i could not ! "
" to me , to a brother ? " said felton .
milady looked at him for some time with an expression which the young man took for doubt , but which , however , was nothing but observation , or rather the wish to fascinate .
felton , in his turn a suppliant , clasped his hands .
" well , then , " said milady , " i confide in my brother ; i will dare to-- "
at this moment the steps of lord de winter were heard ; but this time the terrible brother - in - law of milady did not content himself , as on the preceding day , with passing before the door and going away again . he paused , exchanged two words with the sentinel ; then the door opened , and he appeared .
during the exchange of these two words felton drew back quickly , and when lord de winter entered , he was several paces from the prisoner .
the baron entered slowly , sending a scrutinizing glance from milady to the young officer .
felton started ; and milady felt she was lost if she did not come to the assistance of the disconcerted puritan .
" ah , you fear your prisoner should escape ! " said she . " well , ask your worthy jailer what favor i this instant solicited of him . "
" you demanded a favor ? " said the baron , suspiciously .
" yes , my lord , " replied the young man , confused .
" and what favor , pray ? " asked lord de winter .
" a knife , which she would return to me through the grating of the door a minute after she had received it , " replied felton .
" there is someone , then , concealed here whose throat this amiable lady is desirous of cutting , " said de winter , in an ironical , contemptuous tone .
" there is myself , " replied milady .
" i have given you the choice between america and tyburn , " replied lord de winter . " choose tyburn , madame . believe me , the cord is more certain than the knife . "
felton grew pale , and made a step forward , remembering that at the moment he entered milady had a rope in her hand .
" you are right , " said she , " i have often thought of it . " then she added in a low voice , " and i will think of it again . "
felton felt a shudder run to the marrow of his bones ; probably lord de winter perceived this emotion .
" mistrust yourself , john , " said he . " i have placed reliance upon you , my friend . beware !
i have warned you !
but be of good courage , my lad ; in three days we shall be delivered from this creature , and where i shall send her she can harm nobody . "
" you hear him ! " cried milady , with vehemence , so that the baron might believe she was addressing heaven , and that felton might understand she was addressing him .
felton lowered his head and reflected .
the baron took the young officer by the arm , and turned his head over his shoulder , so as not to lose sight of milady till he was gone out .
" well , " said the prisoner , when the door was shut , " i am not so far advanced as i believed .
de winter has changed his usual stupidity into a strange prudence . it is the desire of vengeance , and how desire molds a man !
as to felton , he hesitates .
ah , he is not a man like that cursed dartagnan .
a puritan only adores virgins , and he adores them by clasping his hands .
a musketeer loves women , and he loves them by clasping his arms round them . "
milady waited , then , with much impatience , for she feared the day would pass away without her seeing felton again .
at last , in an hour after the scene we have just described , she heard someone speaking in a low voice at the door . presently the door opened , and she perceived felton .
the young man advanced rapidly into the chamber , leaving the door open behind him , and making a sign to milady to be silent ; his face was much agitated .
" what do you want with me ? " said she .
" listen , " replied felton , in a low voice . " i have just sent away the sentinel that i might remain here without anybody knowing it , in order to speak to you without being overheard .
the baron has just related a frightful story to me . "
milady assumed her smile of a resigned victim , and shook her head .
" either you are a demon , " continued felton , " or the baron -- my benefactor , my father -- is a monster .
i have known you four days ; i have loved him four years . i therefore may hesitate between you . be not alarmed at what i say ; i want to be convinced .
tonight , after twelve , i will come and see you , and you shall convince me . "
" no , felton , no , my brother , " said she ; " the sacrifice is too great , and i feel what it must cost you .
no , i am lost ; do not be lost with me .
my death will be much more eloquent than my life , and the silence of the corpse will convince you much better than the words of the prisoner . "
" be silent , madame , " cried felton , " and do not speak to me thus ; i came to entreat you to promise me upon your honor , to swear to me by what you hold most sacred , that you will make no attempt upon your life . "
" well , " said felton , " only promise till you have seen me again .
if , when you have seen me again , you still persist -- well , then you shall be free , and i myself will give you the weapon you desire . "
" well , " said milady , " for you i will wait . "
" swear . "
" i swear it , by our god .
are you satisfied ? "
" well , " said felton , " till tonight . "
and he darted out of the room , shut the door , and waited in the corridor , the soldier s half - pike in his hand , and as if he had mounted guard in his place .
the soldier returned , and felton gave him back his weapon .
then , through the grating to which she had drawn near , milady saw the young man make a sign with delirious fervor , and depart in an apparent transport of joy .
as for her , she returned to her place with a smile of savage contempt upon her lips , and repeated , blaspheming , that terrible name of god , by whom she had just sworn without ever having learned to know him .
56 captivity : the fifth day
milady had however achieved a half - triumph , and success doubled her forces .
it was not difficult to conquer , as she had hitherto done , men prompt to let themselves be seduced , and whom the gallant education of a court led quickly into her net . milady was handsome enough not to find much resistance on the part of the flesh , and she was sufficiently skillful to prevail over all the obstacles of the mind .
but this time she had to contend with an unpolished nature , concentrated and insensible by force of austerity . religion and its observances had made felton a man inaccessible to ordinary seductions .
there fermented in that sublimated brain plans so vast , projects so tumultuous , that there remained no room for any capricious or material love -- that sentiment which is fed by leisure and grows with corruption .
milady had , then , made a breach by her false virtue in the opinion of a man horribly prejudiced against her , and by her beauty in the heart of a man hitherto chaste and pure .
in short , she had taken the measure of motives hitherto unknown to herself , through this experiment , made upon the most rebellious subject that nature and religion could submit to her study .
many a time , nevertheless , during the evening she despaired of fate and of herself . she did not invoke god , we very well know , but she had faith in the genius of evil -- that immense sovereignty which reigns in all the details of human life , and by which , as in the arabian fable , a single pomegranate seed is sufficient to reconstruct a ruined world .
milady , being well prepared for the reception of felton , was able to erect her batteries for the next day .
she knew she had only two days left ; that when once the order was signed by buckingham -- and buckingham would sign it the more readily from its bearing a false name , and he could not , therefore , recognize the woman in question -- once this order was signed , we say , the baron would make her embark immediately , and she knew very well that women condemned to exile employ arms much less powerful in their seductions than the pretendedly virtuous woman whose beauty is lighted by the sun of the world , whose style the voice of fashion lauds , and whom a halo of aristocracy gilds with enchanting splendors .
to be a woman condemned to a painful and disgraceful punishment is no impediment to beauty , but it is an obstacle to the recovery of power .
like all persons of real genius , milady knew what suited her nature and her means .
poverty was repugnant to her ; degradation took away two - thirds of her greatness .
milady was only a queen while among queens . the pleasure of satisfied pride was necessary to her domination .
to command inferior beings was rather a humiliation than a pleasure for her .
she should certainly return from her exile -- she did not doubt that a single instant ; but how long might this exile last ?
for an active , ambitious nature , like that of milady , days not spent in climbing are inauspicious days . what word , then , can be found to describe the days which they occupy in descending ?
for the rest , the storm which raged within her doubled her strength , and she would have burst the walls of her prison if her body had been able to take for a single instant the proportions of her mind .
then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of all this was the remembrance of the cardinal .
what must the mistrustful , restless , suspicious cardinal think of her silence -- the cardinal , not merely her only support , her only prop , her only protector at present , but still further , the principal instrument of her future fortune and vengeance ?
then milady collected all her energies , murmuring in the depths of her soul the name of felton -- the only beam of light that penetrated to her in the hell into which she had fallen ; and like a serpent which folds and unfolds its rings to ascertain its strength , she enveloped felton beforehand in the thousand meshes of her inventive imagination .
time , however , passed away ; the hours , one after another , seemed to awaken the clock as they passed , and every blow of the brass hammer resounded upon the heart of the prisoner .
at nine oclock , lord de winter made his customary visit , examined the window and the bars , sounded the floor and the walls , looked to the chimney and the doors , without , during this long and minute examination , he or milady pronouncing a single word .
doubtless both of them understood that the situation had become too serious to lose time in useless words and aimless wrath .
" well , " said the baron , on leaving her " you will not escape tonight ! "
at ten oclock felton came and placed the sentinel . milady recognized his step .
she was as well acquainted with it now as a mistress is with that of the lover of her heart ; and yet milady at the same time detested and despised this weak fanatic .
that was not the appointed hour . felton did not enter .
two hours after , as midnight sounded , the sentinel was relieved .
this time it was the hour , and from this moment milady waited with impatience .
the new sentinel commenced his walk in the corridor .
at the expiration of ten minutes felton came .
milady was all attention .
" yes , i know it , " said the soldier .
" i recommend you therefore to keep the strictest watch .
for my part i am going to pay a second visit to this woman , who i fear entertains sinister intentions upon her own life , and i have received orders to watch her . "
" good ! " murmured milady ; " the austere puritan lies . "
as to the soldier , he only smiled .
" zounds , lieutenant ! " said he ; " you are not unlucky in being charged with such commissions , particularly if my lord has authorized you to look into her bed . " felton blushed .
under any other circumstances he would have reprimanded the soldier for indulging in such pleasantry , but his conscience murmured too loud for his mouth to dare speak .
" if i call , come , " said he . " if anyone comes , call me . "
" i will , lieutenant , " said the soldier .
felton entered milady s apartment .
milady arose .
" you are here ! " said she .
" i promised to come , " said felton , " and i have come . "
" you promised me something else . "
" what , my god ! " said the young man , who in spite of his self - command felt his knees tremble and the sweat start from his brow .
" you promised to bring a knife , and to leave it with me after our interview . "
" say no more of that , madame , " said felton . " there is no situation , however terrible it may be , which can authorize a creature of god to inflict death upon himself .
i have reflected , and i can not , must not be guilty of such a sin . "
" ah , you have reflected ! " said the prisoner , sitting down in her armchair , with a smile of disdain ; " and i also have reflected . "
" upon what ? "
" that i can have nothing to say to a man who does not keep his word . "
" oh , my god ! " murmured felton .
" you may retire , " said milady . " i will not talk . "
" here is the knife , " said felton , drawing from his pocket the weapon which he had brought , according to his promise , but which he hesitated to give to his prisoner .
" let me see it , " said milady .
" for what purpose ? "
" upon my honor , i will instantly return it to you . you shall place it on that table , and you may remain between it and me . "
felton offered the weapon to milady , who examined the temper of it attentively , and who tried the point on the tip of her finger .
" well , " said she , returning the knife to the young officer , " this is fine and good steel . you are a faithful friend , felton . "
felton took back the weapon , and laid it upon the table , as he had agreed with the prisoner .
milady followed him with her eyes , and made a gesture of satisfaction .
" now , " said she , " listen to me . "
the request was needless . the young officer stood upright before her , awaiting her words as if to devour them .
milady stopped , and a bitter smile passed over her lips .
" finally , " said felton , " finally , what did they do ? "
i fell upon one knee , then upon both . i tried to pray , but my tongue was frozen .
my mind appeared to strive in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of the sleep from which i could not rouse myself .
i was no longer in the house where i had dwelt .
what had taken place during this long sleep ?
the chamber was evidently furnished for the reception of a woman ; and the most finished coquette could not have formed a wish , but on casting her eyes about the apartment , she would have found that wish accomplished .
" certainly i was not the first captive that had been shut up in this splendid prison ; but you may easily comprehend , felton , that the more superb the prison , the greater was my terror .
" yes , it was a prison , for i tried in vain to get out of it .
i sounded all the walls , in the hopes of discovering a door , but everywhere the walls returned a full and flat sound .
" i made the tour of the room at least twenty times , in search of an outlet of some kind ; but there was none . i sank exhausted with fatigue and terror into an armchair .
" meantime , night came on rapidly , and with night my terrors increased . i did not know but i had better remain where i was seated . it appeared that i was surrounded with unknown dangers into which i was about to fall at every instant .
although i had eaten nothing since the evening before , my fears prevented my feeling hunger .
" no noise from without by which i could measure the time reached me ; i only supposed it must be seven or eight oclock in the evening , for it was in the month of october and it was quite dark .
" all at once the noise of a door , turning on its hinges , made me start . a globe of fire appeared above the glazed opening of the ceiling , casting a strong light into my chamber ; and i perceived with terror that a man was standing within a few paces of me .
" a table , with two covers , bearing a supper ready prepared , stood , as if by magic , in the middle of the apartment .
" that man was he who had pursued me during a whole year , who had vowed my dishonor , and who , by the first words that issued from his mouth , gave me to understand he had accomplished it the preceding night . "
" take one step more , " said i , " and in addition to my dishonor , you shall have my death to reproach yourself with . "
adieu , my charmer ; i will wait to pay you my next visit till you are in a better humor . 
" at these words he blew a whistle ; the globe of fire which lighted the room reascended and disappeared . i found myself again in complete darkness .
the same noise of a door opening and shutting was repeated the instant afterward ; the flaming globe descended afresh , and i was completely alone .
" this moment was frightful ; if i had any doubts as to my misfortune , these doubts had vanished in an overwhelming reality . i was in the power of a man whom i not only detested , but despised -- of a man capable of anything , and who had already given me a fatal proof of what he was able to do . "
" but who , then was this man ? " asked felton .
but the night passed away without any fresh attempt on the part of my persecutor . day came ; the table had disappeared , only i had still the knife in my hand .
" this knife was my only hope . " i was worn out with fatigue .
it was forty - eight hours since i had taken any nourishment .
" and yet , notwithstanding these precautions , i remained for some time in a terrible agitation of mind . but my fears were this time ill - founded ; i passed the day without experiencing anything of the kind i dreaded .
" i took the precaution to half empty the carafe , in order that my suspicions might not be noticed .
suspicion instantly seized me . i paused , but i had already drunk half a glass .
" half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began to appear ; but as i had only drunk half a glass of the water , i contended longer , and instead of falling entirely asleep , i sank into a state of drowsiness which left me a perception of what was passing around me , while depriving me of the strength either to defend myself or to fly .
" i dragged myself toward the bed , to seek the only defense i had left -- my saving knife ; but i could not reach the bolster . i sank on my knees , my hands clasped round one of the bedposts ; then i felt that i was lost . "
felton became frightfully pale , and a convulsive tremor crept through his whole body .
" and what was most frightful , " continued milady , her voice altered , as if she still experienced the same agony as at that awful minute , " was that at this time i retained a consciousness of the danger that threatened me ; was that my soul , if i may say so , waked in my sleeping body ; was that i saw , that i heard . it is true that all was like a dream , but it was not the less frightful .
" i saw the lamp ascend , and leave me in darkness ; then i heard the well - known creaking of the door although i had heard that door open but twice .
" i felt instinctively that someone approached me ; it is said that the doomed wretch in the deserts of america thus feels the approach of the serpent .
" i wished to make an effort ; i attempted to cry out . by an incredible effort of will i even raised myself up , but only to sink down again immediately , and to fall into the arms of my persecutor . "
" tell me who this man was ! " cried the young officer .
milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings she inspired in felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital ; but she would not spare him a single pang .
the more profoundly she wounded his heart , the more certainly he would avenge her .
she continued , then , as if she had not heard his exclamation , or as if she thought the moment was not yet come to reply to it .
" only this time it was no longer an inert body , without feeling , that the villain had to deal with .
i have told you that without being able to regain the complete exercise of my faculties , i retained the sense of my danger . i struggled , then , with all my strength , and doubtless opposed , weak as i was , a long resistance , for i heard him cry out ,  these miserable puritans !
i knew very well that they tired out their executioners , but i did not believe them so strong against their lovers ! 
" alas ! this desperate resistance could not last long . i felt my strength fail , and this time it was not my sleep that enabled the coward to prevail , but my swoon . "
felton listened without uttering any word or sound , except an inward expression of agony . the sweat streamed down his marble forehead , and his hand , under his coat , tore his breast .
" my first impulse , on coming to myself , was to feel under my pillow for the knife i had not been able to reach ; if it had not been useful for defense , it might at least serve for expiation .
" but on taking this knife , felton , a terrible idea occurred to me .
" the idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man , did it not ? " cried felton .
" yes , " said milady . " the idea was not that of a christian , i knew ; but without doubt , that eternal enemy of our souls , that lion roaring constantly around us , breathed it into my mind .
" continue , continue ! " said felton ; " i am eager to see you attain your vengeance ! "
" oh , i resolved that it should take place as soon as possible . i had no doubt he would return the following night .
" when the hour of breakfast came , therefore , i did not hesitate to eat and drink . i had determined to make believe sup , but to eat nothing . i was forced , then , to combat the fast of the evening with the nourishment of the morning .
" only i concealed a glass of water , which remained after my breakfast , thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when i remained forty - eight hours without eating or drinking .
" the day passed away without having any other influence on me than to strengthen the resolution i had formed ; only i took care that my face should not betray the thoughts of my heart , for i had no doubt i was watched . several times , even , i felt a smile on my lips .
felton , i dare not tell you at what idea i smiled ; you would hold me in horror-- "
" go on ! go on ! " said felton ; " you see plainly that i listen , and that i am anxious to know the end . "
" evening came ; the ordinary events took place . during the darkness , as before , my supper was brought . then the lamp was lighted , and i sat down to table .
i only ate some fruit . i pretended to pour out water from the jug , but i only drank that which i had saved in my glass . the substitution was made so carefully that my spies , if i had any , could have no suspicion of it .
" after supper i exhibited the same marks of languor as on the preceding evening ; but this time , as i yielded to fatigue , or as if i had become familiarized with danger , i dragged myself toward my bed , let my robe fall , and lay down .
" i found my knife where i had placed it , under my pillow , and while feigning to sleep , my hand grasped the handle of it convulsively .
" at length i saw the lamp rise softly , and disappear in the depths of the ceiling ; my chamber was filled with darkness and obscurity , but i made a strong effort to penetrate this darkness and obscurity .
" nearly ten minutes passed ; i heard no other noise but the beating of my own heart .
i implored heaven that he might come .
" at length i heard the well - known noise of the door , which opened and shut ; i heard , notwithstanding the thickness of the carpet , a step which made the floor creak ; i saw , notwithstanding the darkness , a shadow which approached my bed . "
" haste ! haste ! " said felton ; " do you not see that each of your words burns me like molten lead ? "
" then , " continued milady , " then i collected all my strength ; i recalled to my mind that the moment of vengeance , or rather , of justice , had struck . i looked upon myself as another judith ; i gathered myself up , my knife in my hand , and when i saw him near me , stretching out his arms to find his victim , then , with the last cry of agony and despair , i struck him in the middle of his breast .
" the miserable villain ! he had foreseen all . his breast was covered with a coat - of - mail ; the knife was bent against it .
i thought you had softened . i am not one of those tyrants who detain women by force .
tomorrow you shall be free . 
" i had but one wish ; that was that he should kill me .
"  beware !  said i ,  for my liberty is your dishonor . 
above you there is the king ; above the king there is god ! 
" however perfect master he was over himself , my persecutor allowed a movement of anger to escape him .
i could not see the expression of his countenance , but i felt the arm tremble upon which my hand was placed .
"  then you shall not leave this place ,  said he .
"  very well ,  cried i ,  then the place of my punishment will be that of my tomb .
i will die here , and you will see if a phantom that accuses is not more terrible than a living being that threatens ! 
"  you shall have no weapon left in your power . 
"  there is a weapon which despair has placed within the reach of every creature who has the courage to use it .
i will allow myself to die with hunger . 
"  come ,  said the wretch ,  is not peace much better than such a war as that ?
"  and i will say that you are the sextus . i will denounce you before men , as i have denounced you before god ; and if it be necessary that , like lucretia , i should sign my accusation with my blood , i will sign it . 
"  ah !  said my enemy , in a jeering tone ,  that s quite another thing .
my faith ! everything considered , you are very well off here . you shall want for nothing , and if you let yourself die of hunger that will be your own fault . 
" at these words he retired . i heard the door open and shut , and i remained overwhelmed , less , i confess it , by my grief than by the mortification of not having avenged myself .
" he kept his word .
all the day , all the next night passed away without my seeing him again .
but i also kept my word with him , and i neither ate nor drank . i was , as i told him , resolved to die of hunger .
" i passed the day and the night in prayer , for i hoped that god would pardon me my suicide .
" the second night the door opened ; i was lying on the floor , for my strength began to abandon me .
" at the noise i raised myself up on one hand .
"  well ,  said a voice which vibrated in too terrible a manner in my ear not to be recognized ,  well ! are we softened a little ? will we not pay for our liberty with a single promise of silence ?
" i mustered all my strength to reply to him with a burst of laughter .
" he saw that it was a merciless war between us -- a war to the death .
"  listen !  said he .  i give you the rest of tonight and all day tomorrow . reflect : promise to be silent , and riches , consideration , even honor , shall surround you ; threaten to speak , and i will condemn you to infamy . 
"  you ?  cried i.  you ? 
"  to interminable , ineffaceable infamy ! 
"  you ?  repeated i. oh , i declare to you , felton , i thought him mad !
"  yes , yes , i !  replied he .
"  very well , it is your own doing . till tomorrow evening , then ! 
"  till tomorrow evening , then !  replied i , allowing myself to fall , and biting the carpet with rage . "
felton leaned for support upon a piece of furniture ; and milady saw , with the joy of a demon , that his strength would fail him perhaps before the end of her recital .
57 means for classical tragedy
after a moment of silence employed by milady in observing the young man who listened to her , milady continued her recital .
terror recalled me to myself . " he entered the apartment followed by a man in a mask .
he was masked likewise ; but i knew his step , i knew his voice , i knew him by that imposing bearing which hell has bestowed upon his person for the curse of humanity .
"  well ,  said he to me ,  have you made your mind up to take the oath i requested of you ? 
"  you have said puritans have but one word . mine you have heard , and that is to pursue you -- on earth to the tribunal of men , in heaven to the tribunal of god . 
"  you persist , then ? 
"  i swear it before the god who hears me . i will take the whole world as a witness of your crime , and that until i have found an avenger . 
"  you are a prostitute ,  said he , in a voice of thunder ,  and you shall undergo the punishment of prostitutes !
branded in the eyes of the world you invoke , try to prove to that world that you are neither guilty nor mad ! 
" then , addressing the man who accompanied him ,  executioner ,  said he ,  do your duty .  "
" his name , tell it me ! "
" then in spite of my cries , in spite of my resistance -- for i began to comprehend that there was a question of something worse than death -- the executioner seized me , threw me on the floor , fastened me with his bonds , and suffocated by sobs , almost without sense , invoking god , who did not listen to me , i uttered all at once a frightful cry of pain and shame . a burning fire , a red - hot iron , the iron of the executioner , was imprinted on my shoulder . "
felton uttered a groan .
" here , " said milady , rising with the majesty of a queen , " here , felton , behold the new martyrdom invented for a pure young girl , the victim of the brutality of a villain .
learn to know the heart of men , and henceforth make yourself less easily the instrument of their unjust vengeance . "
milady , with a rapid gesture , opened her robe , tore the cambric that covered her bosom , and red with feigned anger and simulated shame , showed the young man the ineffaceable impression which dishonored that beautiful shoulder .
" but , " cried felton , " that is a fleur - de - lis which i see there . "
" and therein consisted the infamy , " replied milady .
this was too much for felton .
pale , motionless , overwhelmed by this frightful revelation , dazzled by the superhuman beauty of this woman who unveiled herself before him with an immodesty which appeared to him sublime , he ended by falling on his knees before her as the early christians did before those pure and holy martyrs whom the persecution of the emperors gave up in the circus to the sanguinary sensuality of the populace .
the brand disappeared ; the beauty alone remained .
" pardon ! pardon ! " cried felton , " oh , pardon ! "
milady read in his eyes love !
love ! " pardon for what ? " asked she .
" pardon me for having joined with your persecutors . "
milady held out her hand to him .
" so beautiful ! so young ! " cried felton , covering that hand with his kisses .
milady let one of those looks fall upon him which make a slave of a king .
felton was a puritan ; he abandoned the hand of this woman to kiss her feet .
he no longer loved her ; he adored her .
when this crisis was past , when milady appeared to have resumed her self - possession , which she had never lost ; when felton had seen her recover with the veil of chastity those treasures of love which were only concealed from him to make him desire them the more ardently , he said , " ah , now !
i have only one thing to ask of you ; that is , the name of your true executioner . for to me there is but one ; the other was an instrument , that was all . "
" what , brother ! " cried milady , " must i name him again ? have you not yet divined who he is ? "
" what ? " cried felton , " he -- again he -- always he ?
what -- the truly guilty ? "
" the truly guilty , " said milady , " is the ravager of england , the persecutor of true believers , the base ravisher of the honor of so many women -- he who , to satisfy a caprice of his corrupt heart , is about to make england shed so much blood , who protects the protestants today and will betray them tomorrow-- " " buckingham !
it is , then , buckingham ! " cried felton , in a high state of excitement .
milady concealed her face in her hands , as if she could not endure the shame which this name recalled to her .
" buckingham , the executioner of this angelic creature ! " cried felton .
" and thou hast not hurled thy thunder at him , my god ! and thou hast left him noble , honored , powerful , for the ruin of us all ! "
" god abandons him who abandons himself , " said milady .
" but he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for the damned ! " said felton , with increasing exultation . " he wills that human vengeance should precede celestial justice . "
" men fear him and spare him . "
" i , " said felton , " i do not fear him , nor will i spare him . "
the soul of milady was bathed in an infernal joy .
" but how can lord de winter , my protector , my father , " asked felton , " possibly be mixed up with all this ? "
" listen , felton , " resumed milady , " for by the side of base and contemptible men there are often found great and generous natures .
i had an affianced husband , a man whom i loved , and who loved me -- a heart like yours , felton , a man like you .
i went to him and told him all ; he knew me , that man did , and did not doubt an instant .
he was a nobleman , a man equal to buckingham in every respect .
he said nothing ; he only girded on his sword , wrapped himself in his cloak , and went straight to buckingham palace .
" yes , yes , " said felton ; " i understand how he would act . but with such men it is not the sword that should be employed ; it is the poniard . "
" buckingham had left england the day before , sent as ambassador to spain , to demand the hand of the infanta for king charles i , who was then only prince of wales .
my affianced husband returned .
"  hear me ,  said he ;  this man has gone , and for the moment has consequently escaped my vengeance ; but let us be united , as we were to have been , and then leave it to lord de winter to maintain his own honor and that of his wife .  "
" lord de winter ! " cried felton .
" yes , " said milady , " lord de winter ; and now you can understand it all , can you not ?
a week before his return lord de winter died , leaving me his sole heir .
whence came the blow ?
god who knows all , knows without doubt ; but as for me , i accuse nobody . "
" oh , what an abyss ; what an abyss ! " cried felton .
" lord de winter died without revealing anything to his brother .
the terrible secret was to be concealed till it burst , like a clap of thunder , over the head of the guilty .
your protector had seen with pain this marriage of his elder brother with a portionless girl .
i was sensible that i could look for no support from a man disappointed in his hopes of an inheritance .
i went to france , with a determination to remain there for the rest of my life .
but all my fortune is in england . communication being closed by the war , i was in want of everything . i was then obliged to come back again . six days ago , i landed at portsmouth . "
" well ? " said felton .
" well ; buckingham heard by some means , no doubt , of my return . he spoke of me to lord de winter , already prejudiced against me , and told him that his sister - in - law was a prostitute , a branded woman .
the noble and pure voice of my husband was no longer here to defend me .
lord de winter believed all that was told him with so much the more ease that it was his interest to believe it .
he caused me to be arrested , had me conducted hither , and placed me under your guard .
you know the rest . the day after tomorrow he banishes me , he transports me ; the day after tomorrow he exiles me among the infamous .
oh , the train is well laid ; the plot is clever . my honor will not survive it !
you see , then , felton , i can do nothing but die . felton , give me that knife ! "
and at these words , as if all her strength was exhausted , milady sank , weak and languishing , into the arms of the young officer , who , intoxicated with love , anger , and voluptuous sensations hitherto unknown , received her with transport , pressed her against his heart , all trembling at the breath from that charming mouth , bewildered by the contact with that palpitating bosom .
" no , no , " said he . " no , you shall live honored and pure ; you shall live to triumph over your enemies . "
felton , my brother , my friend , i conjure you ! "
" no , " cried felton , " no ; you shall live and you shall be avenged . "
felton , abandon me !
felton , let me die ! "
" well , then , we will live and die together ! " cried he , pressing his lips to those of the prisoner .
several strokes resounded on the door ; this time milady really pushed him away from her .
" hark , " said she , " we have been overheard ! someone is coming ! all is over ! we are lost ! "
" no , " said felton ; it is only the sentinel warning me that they are about to change the guard . "
" then run to the door , and open it yourself . "
felton obeyed ; this woman was now his whole thought , his whole soul .
he found himself face to face with a sergeant commanding a watch - patrol .
" well , what is the matter ? " asked the young lieutenant .
" you told me to open the door if i heard anyone cry out , " said the soldier ; " but you forgot to leave me the key . i heard you cry out , without understanding what you said . i tried to open the door , but it was locked inside ; then i called the sergeant . "
" and here i am , " said the sergeant .
felton , quite bewildered , almost mad , stood speechless .
" great god ! " exclaimed felton , on seeing the knife glitter in her hand .
at that moment a burst of ironical laughter resounded through the corridor .
the baron , attracted by the noise , in his chamber gown , his sword under his arm , stood in the doorway .
" ah , " said he , " here we are , at the last act of the tragedy . you see , felton , the drama has gone through all the phases i named ; but be easy , no blood will flow . "
milady perceived that all was lost unless she gave felton an immediate and terrible proof of her courage .
" you are mistaken , my lord , blood will flow ; and may that blood fall back on those who cause it to flow ! "
felton uttered a cry , and rushed toward her . he was too late ; milady had stabbed herself .
but the knife had fortunately , we ought to say skillfully , come in contact with the steel busk , which at that period , like a cuirass , defended the chests of women . it had glided down it , tearing the robe , and had penetrated slantingly between the flesh and the ribs .
milady s robe was not the less stained with blood in a second .
milady fell down , and seemed to be in a swoon .
felton snatched away the knife .
" see , my lord , " said he , in a deep , gloomy tone , " here is a woman who was under my guard , and who has killed herself ! "
" be at ease , felton , " said lord de winter . " she is not dead ; demons do not die so easily . be tranquil , and go wait for me in my chamber . "
" but , my lord-- "
" go , sir , i command you ! "
at this injunction from his superior , felton obeyed ; but in going out , he put the knife into his bosom .
as to lord de winter , he contented himself with calling the woman who waited on milady , and when she was come , he recommended the prisoner , who was still fainting , to her care , and left them alone .
meanwhile , all things considered and notwithstanding his suspicions , as the wound might be serious , he immediately sent off a mounted man to find a physician .
58 escape
as lord de winter had thought , milady s wound was not dangerous . so soon as she was left alone with the woman whom the baron had summoned to her assistance she opened her eyes .
it was , however , necessary to affect weakness and pain -- not a very difficult task for so finished an actress as milady . thus the poor woman was completely the dupe of the prisoner , whom , notwithstanding her hints , she persisted in watching all night .
but the presence of this woman did not prevent milady from thinking .
milady smiled at this thought , for felton was now her only hope -- her only means of safety .
but lord de winter might suspect him ; felton himself might now be watched !
toward four oclock in the morning the doctor arrived ; but since the time milady stabbed herself , however short , the wound had closed . the doctor could therefore measure neither the direction nor the depth of it ; he only satisfied himself by milady s pulse that the case was not serious .
in the morning milady , under the pretext that she had not slept well in the night and wanted rest , sent away the woman who attended her .
she had one hope , which was that felton would appear at the breakfast hour ; but felton did not come .
were her fears realized ?
was felton , suspected by the baron , about to fail her at the decisive moment ?
she had only one day left . lord de winter had announced her embarkation for the twenty - third , and it was now the morning of the twenty - second .
nevertheless she still waited patiently till the hour for dinner .
although she had eaten nothing in the morning , the dinner was brought in at its usual time . milady then perceived , with terror , that the uniform of the soldiers who guarded her was changed .
then she ventured to ask what had become of felton .
she was told that he had left the castle an hour before on horseback .
she inquired if the baron was still at the castle . the soldier replied that he was , and that he had given orders to be informed if the prisoner wished to speak to him .
milady replied that she was too weak at present , and that her only desire was to be left alone .
the soldier went out , leaving the dinner served .
this was the last blow to the prisoner . left alone , she arose .
the bed , which she had kept from prudence and that they might believe her seriously wounded , burned her like a bed of fire .
she cast a glance at the door ; the baron had had a plank nailed over the grating . he no doubt feared that by this opening she might still by some diabolical means corrupt her guards .
milady smiled with joy . she was free now to give way to her transports without being observed . she traversed her chamber with the excitement of a furious maniac or of a tigress shut up in an iron cage .
certes , if the knife had been left in her power , she would now have thought , not of killing herself , but of killing the baron .
at six oclock lord de winter came in . he was armed at all points .
this man , in whom milady till that time had only seen a very simple gentleman , had become an admirable jailer . he appeared to foresee all , to divine all , to anticipate all .
a single look at milady apprised him of all that was passing in her mind .
" ay ! " said he , " i see ; but you shall not kill me today . you have no longer a weapon ; and besides , i am on my guard .
you had begun to pervert my poor felton . he was yielding to your infernal influence ; but i will save him . he will never see you again ; all is over .
get your clothes together . tomorrow you will go .
tomorrow , by twelve oclock , i shall have the order for your exile , signed , buckingham .
that is agreed upon . " au revoir ; then ; that is all i have to say today .
tomorrow i will see you again , to take my leave . "
with these words the baron went out .
milady had listened to all this menacing tirade with a smile of disdain on her lips , but rage in her heart . supper was served .
all at once she heard a tap at her window , and by the help of a flash of lightning she saw the face of a man appear behind the bars .
she ran to the window and opened it .
" felton ! " cried she . " i am saved . "
only take care that i am not seen through the wicket . "
" oh , it is a proof that the lord is on our side , felton , " replied milady . " they have closed up the grating with a board . "
" that is well ; god has made them senseless , " said felton .
" but what must i do ? " asked milady .
" nothing , nothing , only shut the window .
but will you be able to follow me ? "
" oh , yes ! "
" your wound ? "
" gives me pain , but will not prevent my walking . "
" be ready , then , at the first signal . "
milady shut the window , extinguished the lamp , and went , as felton had desired her , to lie down on the bed .
amid the moaning of the storm she heard the grinding of the file upon the bars , and by the light of every flash she perceived the shadow of felton through the panes .
she passed an hour without breathing , panting , with a cold sweat upon her brow , and her heart oppressed by frightful agony at every movement she heard in the corridor .
there are hours which last a year .
at the expiration of an hour , felton tapped again .
milady sprang out of bed and opened the window .
two bars removed formed an opening for a man to pass through .
" are you ready ? " asked felton .
" yes .
must i take anything with me ? "
" money , if you have any . "
" yes ; fortunately they have left me all i had . "
" so much the better , for i have expended all mine in chartering a vessel . "
" here ! " said milady , placing a bag full of louis in felton s hands .
felton took the bag and threw it to the foot of the wall .
" now , " said he , " will you come ? "
" i am ready . "
milady mounted upon a chair and passed the upper part of her body through the window . she saw the young officer suspended over the abyss by a ladder of ropes .
for the first time an emotion of terror reminded her that she was a woman .
the dark space frightened her .
" i expected this , " said felton .
" it s nothing , it s nothing ! " said milady . " i will descend with my eyes shut . "
" have you confidence in me ? " said felton .
" you ask that ? "
" put your two hands together . cross them ; that s right ! "
felton tied her two wrists together with his handkerchief , and then with a cord over the handkerchief .
" what are you doing ? " asked milady , with surprise .
" pass your arms around my neck , and fear nothing . "
" but i shall make you lose your balance , and we shall both be dashed to pieces . "
" do nt be afraid . i am a sailor . "
not a second was to be lost . milady passed her two arms round felton s neck , and let herself slip out of the window .
felton began to descend the ladder slowly , step by step .
despite the weight of two bodies , the blast of the hurricane shook them in the air .
all at once felton stopped .
" what is the matter ? " asked milady .
" silence , " said felton , " i hear footsteps . "
" we are discovered ! "
there was a silence of several seconds .
" no , " said felton , " it is nothing . "
" but what , then , is the noise ? "
" that of the patrol going their rounds . "
" where is their road ? "
" just under us . "
" they will discover us ! "
" no , if it does not lighten . "
" but they will run against the bottom of the ladder . "
" fortunately it is too short by six feet . "
" here they are ! my god ! "
" silence ! "
both remained suspended , motionless and breathless , within twenty paces of the ground , while the patrol passed beneath them laughing and talking .
this was a terrible moment for the fugitives .
the patrol passed . the noise of their retreating footsteps and the murmur of their voices soon died away .
" now , " said felton , " we are safe . "
milady breathed a deep sigh and fainted .
felton continued to descend .
near the bottom of the ladder , when he found no more support for his feet , he clung with his hands ; at length , arrived at the last step , he let himself hang by the strength of his wrists , and touched the ground .
he stooped down , picked up the bag of money , and placed it between his teeth .
then he took milady in his arms , and set off briskly in the direction opposite to that which the patrol had taken .
he soon left the pathway of the patrol , descended across the rocks , and when arrived on the edge of the sea , whistled .
a similar signal replied to him ; and five minutes after , a boat appeared , rowed by four men .
the boat approached as near as it could to the shore ; but there was not depth enough of water for it to touch land . felton walked into the sea up to his middle , being unwilling to trust his precious burden to anybody .
fortunately the storm began to subside , but still the sea was disturbed . the little boat bounded over the waves like a nut - shell .
" to the sloop , " said felton , " and row quickly . "
the four men bent to their oars , but the sea was too high to let them get much hold of it .
however , they left the castle behind ; that was the principal thing .
the night was extremely dark . it was almost impossible to see the shore from the boat ; they would therefore be less likely to see the boat from the shore .
a black point floated on the sea .
that was the sloop .
while the boat was advancing with all the speed its four rowers could give it , felton untied the cord and then the handkerchief which bound milady s hands together .
when her hands were loosed he took some sea water and sprinkled it over her face .
milady breathed a sigh , and opened her eyes .
" where am i ? " said she .
" saved ! " replied the young officer .
" oh , saved , saved ! " cried she .
ah , thanks , felton , thanks ! "
the young man pressed her to his heart .
" but what is the matter with my hands ! " asked milady ; " it seems as if my wrists had been crushed in a vice . "
milady held out her arms ; her wrists were bruised .
" alas ! " said felton , looking at those beautiful hands , and shaking his head sorrowfully .
" oh , it s nothing , nothing ! " cried milady . " i remember now . "
milady looked around her , as if in search of something .
" it is there , " said felton , touching the bag of money with his foot .
they drew near to the sloop .
a sailor on watch hailed the boat ; the boat replied .
" what vessel is that ? " asked milady .
" the one i have hired for you . "
" where will it take me ? "
" where you please , after you have put me on shore at portsmouth . "
" what are you going to do at portsmouth ? " asked milady .
" accomplish the orders of lord de winter , " said felton , with a gloomy smile .
" what orders ? " asked milady .
" you do not understand ? " asked felton .
" no ; explain yourself , i beg . "
" as he mistrusted me , he determined to guard you himself , and sent me in his place to get buckingham to sign the order for your transportation . "
" but if he mistrusted you , how could he confide such an order to you ? "
" how could i know what i was the bearer of ? "
" that s true !
and you are going to portsmouth ? "
" i have no time to lose . tomorrow is the twenty - third , and buckingham sets sail tomorrow with his fleet . "
" he sets sail tomorrow ! where for ? "
" for la rochelle . "
" he need not sail ! " cried milady , forgetting her usual presence of mind .
" be satisfied , " replied felton ; " he will not sail . "
milady started with joy . she could read to the depths of the heart of this young man ; the death of buckingham was written there at full length .
" felton , " cried she , " you are as great as judas maccabeus !
if you die , i will die with you ; that is all i can say to you . "
" silence ! " cried felton ; " we are here . "
in fact , they touched the sloop .
felton mounted the ladder first , and gave his hand to milady , while the sailors supported her , for the sea was still much agitated .
an instant after they were on the deck .
" captain , " said felton , " this is the person of whom i spoke to you , and whom you must convey safe and sound to france . "
" for a thousand pistoles , " said the captain .
" i have paid you five hundred of them . "
" that s correct , " said the captain .
" and here are the other five hundred , " replied milady , placing her hand upon the bag of gold .
" no , " said the captain , " i make but one bargain ; and i have agreed with this young man that the other five hundred shall not be due to me till we arrive at boulogne . "
" and shall we arrive there ? "
" safe and sound , as true as my name s jack butler . "
" well , " said milady , " if you keep your word , instead of five hundred , i will give you a thousand pistoles . "
" hurrah for you , then , my beautiful lady , " cried the captain ; " and may god often send me such passengers as your ladyship ! "
" meanwhile , " said felton , " convey me to the little bay of-- ; you know it was agreed you should put in there . "
the captain replied by ordering the necessary maneuvers , and toward seven oclock in the morning the little vessel cast anchor in the bay that had been named .
during this passage , felton related everything to milady -- how , instead of going to london , he had chartered the little vessel ; how he had returned ; how he had scaled the wall by fastening cramps in the interstices of the stones , as he ascended , to give him foothold ; and how , when he had reached the bars , he fastened his ladder . milady knew the rest .
on her side , milady tried to encourage felton in his project ; but at the first words which issued from her mouth , she plainly saw that the young fanatic stood more in need of being moderated than urged .
it was agreed that milady should wait for felton till ten oclock ; if he did not return by ten oclock she was to sail .
in that case , and supposing he was at liberty , he was to rejoin her in france , at the convent of the carmelites at bethune .
59 what took place at portsmouth august 23 , 1628
felton took leave of milady as a brother about to go for a mere walk takes leave of his sister , kissing her hand .
his whole body appeared in its ordinary state of calmness , only an unusual fire beamed from his eyes , like the effects of a fever ; his brow was more pale than it generally was ; his teeth were clenched , and his speech had a short dry accent which indicated that something dark was at work within him .
as long as he remained in the boat which conveyed him to land , he kept his face toward milady , who , standing on the deck , followed him with her eyes .
both were free from the fear of pursuit ; nobody ever came into milady s apartment before nine oclock , and it would require three hours to go from the castle to london .
felton jumped onshore , climbed the little ascent which led to the top of the cliff , saluted milady a last time , and took his course toward the city .
at the end of a hundred paces , the ground began to decline , and he could only see the mast of the sloop .
he immediately ran in the direction of portsmouth , which he saw at nearly half a league before him , standing out in the haze of the morning , with its houses and towers .
beyond portsmouth the sea was covered with vessels whose masts , like a forest of poplars despoiled by the winter , bent with each breath of the wind .
felton , in his rapid walk , reviewed in his mind all the accusations against the favorite of james i and charles i , furnished by two years of premature meditation and a long sojourn among the puritans .
when he compared the public crimes of this minister -- startling crimes , european crimes , if so we may say -- with the private and unknown crimes with which milady had charged him , felton found that the more culpable of the two men which formed the character of buckingham was the one of whom the public knew not the life .
this was because his love , so strange , so new , and so ardent , made him view the infamous and imaginary accusations of milady de winter as , through a magnifying glass , one views as frightful monsters atoms in reality imperceptible by the side of an ant .
the rapidity of his walk heated his blood still more ; the idea that he left behind him , exposed to a frightful vengeance , the woman he loved , or rather whom he adored as a saint , the emotion he had experienced , present fatigue -- all together exalted his mind above human feeling .
he entered portsmouth about eight oclock in the morning . the whole population was on foot ; drums were beating in the streets and in the port ; the troops about to embark were marching toward the sea .
at the name of lord de winter , who was known to be one of his grace s most intimate friends , the officer of the post gave orders to let felton pass , who , besides , wore the uniform of a naval officer .
felton darted into the palace .
at the moment he entered the vestibule , another man was entering likewise , dusty , out of breath , leaving at the gate a post horse , which , on reaching the palace , tumbled on his foreknees .
felton and he addressed patrick , the duke s confidential lackey , at the same moment .
felton named lord de winter ; the unknown would not name anybody , and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would make himself known .
each was anxious to gain admission before the other .
patrick , who knew lord de winter was in affairs of the service , and in relations of friendship with the duke , gave the preference to the one who came in his name .
the other was forced to wait , and it was easily to be seen how he cursed the delay .
the valet led felton through a large hall in which waited the deputies from la rochelle , headed by the prince de soubise , and introduced him into a closet where buckingham , just out of the bath , was finishing his toilet , upon which , as at all times , he bestowed extraordinary attention .
" lieutenant felton , from lord de winter , " said patrick .
felton entered .
at that moment buckingham was throwing upon a couch a rich toilet robe , worked with gold , in order to put on a blue velvet doublet embroidered with pearls .
" why did nt the baron come himself ? " demanded buckingham . " i expected him this morning . "
" he desired me to tell your grace , " replied felton , " that he very much regretted not having that honor , but that he was prevented by the guard he is obliged to keep at the castle . "
" yes , i know that , " said buckingham ; " he has a prisoner . "
" it is of that prisoner that i wish to speak to your grace , " replied felton .
" well , then , speak ! "
" that which i have to say of her can only be heard by yourself , my lord ! "
" leave us , patrick , " said buckingham ; " but remain within sound of the bell . i shall call you presently . "
patrick went out .
" we are alone , sir , " said buckingham ; " speak ! "
" my lord , " said felton , " the baron de winter wrote to you the other day to request you to sign an order of embarkation relative to a young woman named charlotte backson . "
" yes , sir ; and i answered him , to bring or send me that order and i would sign it . "
" here it is , my lord . "
" give it to me , " said the duke .
and taking it from felton , he cast a rapid glance over the paper , and perceiving that it was the one that had been mentioned to him , he placed it on the table , took a pen , and prepared to sign it .
" pardon , my lord , " said felton , stopping the duke ; " but does your grace know that the name of charlotte backson is not the true name of this young woman ? "
" yes , sir , i know it , " replied the duke , dipping the quill in the ink .
" then your grace knows her real name ? " asked felton , in a sharp tone .
felton grew pale .
" and knowing that real name , my lord , " replied felton , " will you sign it all the same ? "
" doubtless , " said buckingham , " and rather twice than once . "
" i can not believe , " continued felton , in a voice that became more sharp and rough , " that your grace knows that it is to milady de winter this relates . "
" i know it perfectly , although i am astonished that you know it . "
" and will your grace sign that order without remorse ? "
buckingham looked at the young man haughtily .
" do you know , sir , that you are asking me very strange questions , and that i am very foolish to answer them ? "
" reply to them , my lord , " said felton ; " the circumstances are more serious than you perhaps believe . "
buckingham reflected that the young man , coming from lord de winter , undoubtedly spoke in his name , and softened .
" without remorse , " said he . " the baron knows , as well as myself , that milady de winter is a very guilty woman , and it is treating her very favorably to commute her punishment to transportation . "
the duke put his pen to the paper .
" you will not sign that order , my lord ! " said felton , making a step toward the duke .
" i will not sign this order ! and why not ? "
" because you will look into yourself , and you will do justice to the lady . "
" i should do her justice by sending her to tyburn , " said buckingham . " this lady is infamous . "
" my lord , milady de winter is an angel ; you know that she is , and i demand her liberty of you . "
" bah ! are you mad , to talk to me thus ? " said buckingham .
" my lord , excuse me ! i speak as i can ; i restrain myself .
but , my lord , think of what you re about to do , and beware of going too far ! "
" what do you say ?
god pardon me ! " cried buckingham , " i really think he threatens me ! "
" no , my lord , i still plead . and i say to you : one drop of water suffices to make the full vase overflow ; one slight fault may draw down punishment upon the head spared , despite many crimes . "
" mr . felton , " said buckingham , " you will withdraw , and place yourself at once under arrest . "
" you will hear me to the end , my lord .
you have seduced this young girl ; you have outraged , defiled her . repair your crimes toward her ; let her go free , and i will exact nothing else from you . "
" you will exact ! " said buckingham , looking at felton with astonishment , and dwelling upon each syllable of the three words as he pronounced them .
" my lord , " continued felton , becoming more excited as he spoke , " my lord , beware ! all england is tired of your iniquities ; my lord , you have abused the royal power , which you have almost usurped ; my lord , you are held in horror by god and men . god will punish you hereafter , but i will punish you here ! "
" ah , this is too much ! " cried buckingham , making a step toward the door .
felton barred his passage .
" i ask it humbly of you , my lord , " said he ; " sign the order for the liberation of milady de winter . remember that she is a woman whom you have dishonored . "
" withdraw , sir , " said buckingham , " or i will call my attendant , and have you placed in irons . "
" you shall not call , " said felton , throwing himself between the duke and the bell placed on a stand encrusted with silver . " beware , my lord , you are in the hands of god ! "
" in the hands of the devil , you mean ! " cried buckingham , raising his voice so as to attract the notice of his people , without absolutely shouting .
" sign , my lord ; sign the liberation of milady de winter , " said felton , holding out a paper to the duke .
" by force ? you are joking ! holloa , patrick ! "
" sign , my lord ! "
" never . "
" never ? "
" help ! " shouted the duke ; and at the same time he sprang toward his sword .
but felton did not give him time to draw it . he held the knife with which milady had stabbed herself , open in his bosom ; at one bound he was upon the duke .
at that moment patrick entered the room , crying , " a letter from france , my lord . "
" from france ! " cried buckingham , forgetting everything in thinking from whom that letter came .
felton took advantage of this moment , and plunged the knife into his side up to the handle .
" ah , traitor , " cried buckingham , " you have killed me ! "
" murder ! " screamed patrick .
felton cast his eyes round for means of escape , and seeing the door free , he rushed into the next chamber , in which , as we have said , the deputies from la rochelle were waiting , crossed it as quickly as possible , and rushed toward the staircase ; but upon the first step he met lord de winter , who , seeing him pale , confused , livid , and stained with blood both on his hands and face , seized him by the throat , crying , " i knew it ! i guessed it !
but too late by a minute , unfortunate , unfortunate that i am ! " felton made no resistance .
at the cry uttered by the duke and the scream of patrick , the man whom felton had met in the antechamber rushed into the chamber .
he found the duke reclining upon a sofa , with his hand pressed upon the wound .
" laporte , " said the duke , in a dying voice , " laporte , do you come from her ? "
" yes , monseigneur , " replied the faithful cloak bearer of anne of austria , " but too late , perhaps . "
" silence , laporte , you may be overheard . patrick , let no one enter . oh , i can not tell what she says to me ! my god , i am dying ! "
and the duke swooned .
meanwhile , lord de winter , the deputies , the leaders of the expedition , the officers of buckingham s household , had all made their way into the chamber . cries of despair resounded on all sides .
the news , which filled the palace with tears and groans , soon became known , and spread itself throughout the city .
the report of a cannon announced that something new and unexpected had taken place .
lord de winter tore his hair .
the duke , however , was not dead . he recovered a little , reopened his eyes , and hope revived in all hearts .
" gentlemen , " said he , " leave me alone with patrick and laporte -- ah , is that you , de winter ?
you sent me a strange madman this morning ! see the state in which he has put me . "
" oh , my lord ! " cried the baron , " i shall never console myself . "
" and you would be quite wrong , my dear de winter , " said buckingham , holding out his hand to him . " i do not know the man who deserves being regretted during the whole life of another man ; but leave us , i pray you . "
the baron went out sobbing .
there only remained in the closet of the wounded duke laporte and patrick .
a physician was sought for , but none was yet found .
" you will live , my lord , you will live ! " repeated the faithful servant of anne of austria , on his knees before the duke s sofa .
" what has she written to me ? " said buckingham , feebly , streaming with blood , and suppressing his agony to speak of her he loved , " what has she written to me ?
read me her letter . "
" oh , my lord ! " said laporte .
" obey , laporte , do you not see i have no time to lose ? "
laporte broke the seal , and placed the paper before the eyes of the duke ; but buckingham in vain tried to make out the writing .
" read ! " said he , " read ! i can not see .
read , then !
this war may not only bring great catastrophes upon england and france , but misfortune upon you , my lord , for which i should never console myself .
" be careful of your life , which is menaced , and which will be dear to me from the moment i am not obliged to see an enemy in you .
" your affectionate
" she likewise charged me to tell you that she still loved you . "
" ah , " said buckingham , " god be praised !
my death , then , will not be to her as the death of a stranger ! "
laporte burst into tears .
" patrick , " said the due , " bring me the casket in which the diamond studs were kept . "
patrick brought the object desired , which laporte recognized as having belonged to the queen .
" now the scent bag of white satin , on which her cipher is embroidered in pearls . "
patrick again obeyed .
" here , laporte , " said buckingham , " these are the only tokens i ever received from her -- this silver casket and these two letters .
you will restore them to her majesty ; and as a last memorial"--he looked round for some valuable object--"you will add-- "
he still sought ; but his eyes , darkened by death , encountered only the knife which had fallen from the hand of felton , still smoking with the blood spread over its blade .
" and you will add to them this knife , " said the duke , pressing the hand of laporte .
patrick uttered a loud cry .
buckingham tried to smile a last time ; but death checked his thought , which remained engraved on his brow like a last kiss of love .
at this moment the duke s surgeon arrived , quite terrified ; he was already on board the admiral s ship , where they had been obliged to seek him .
he approached the duke , took his hand , held it for an instant in his own , and letting it fall , " all is useless , " said he , " he is dead . "
" dead , dead ! " cried patrick .
at this cry all the crowd re - entered the apartment , and throughout the palace and town there was nothing but consternation and tumult .
as soon as lord de winter saw buckingham was dead , he ran to felton , whom the soldiers still guarded on the terrace of the palace .
" wretch ! " said he to the young man , who since the death of buckingham had regained that coolness and self - possession which never after abandoned him , " wretch ! what have you done ? "
" i have avenged myself ! " said he .
" rather say that you have served as an instrument to that accursed woman ; but i swear to you that this crime shall be her last . "
" i do nt know what you mean , " replied felton , quietly , " and i am ignorant of whom you are speaking , my lord . i killed the duke of buckingham because he twice refused you yourself to appoint me captain ; i have punished him for his injustice , that is all . "
de winter , stupefied , looked on while the soldiers bound felton , and could not tell what to think of such insensibility .
one thing alone , however , threw a shade over the pallid brow of felton .
at every noise he heard , the simple puritan fancied he recognized the step and voice of milady coming to throw herself into his arms , to accuse herself , and die with him .
all at once he started . his eyes became fixed upon a point of the sea , commanded by the terrace where he was . with the eagle glance of a sailor he had recognized there , where another would have seen only a gull hovering over the waves , the sail of a sloop which was directed toward the cost of france .
he grew deadly pale , placed his hand upon his heart , which was breaking , and at once perceived all the treachery .
" one last favor , my lord ! " said he to the baron .
" what ? " asked his lordship .
" what oclock is it ? "
the baron drew out his watch .
" it wants ten minutes to nine , " said he .
milady had hastened her departure by an hour and a half . as soon as she heard the cannon which announced the fatal event , she had ordered the anchor to be weighed .
the vessel was making way under a blue sky , at great distance from the coast .
" god has so willed it ! " said he , with the resignation of a fanatic ; but without , however , being able to take his eyes from that ship , on board of which he doubtless fancied he could distinguish the white outline of her to whom he had sacrificed his life .
de winter followed his look , observed his feelings , and guessed all .
felton lowered his head without pronouncing a syllable .
as to lord de winter , he descended the stairs rapidly , and went straight to the port .
60 in france
but as he did not think of giving this order till five hours after the event -- that is to say , till two oclock in the afternoon -- two vessels had already left the port , the one bearing , as we know , milady , who , already anticipating the event , was further confirmed in that belief by seeing the black flag flying at the masthead of the admiral s ship .
as to the second vessel , we will tell hereafter whom it carried , and how it set sail .
during this time nothing new occurred in the camp at la rochelle ; only the king , who was bored , as always , but perhaps a little more so in camp than elsewhere , resolved to go incognito and spend the festival of st . louis at st . germain , and asked the cardinal to order him an escort of only twenty musketeers .
the cardinal , who sometimes became weary of the king , granted this leave of absence with great pleasure to his royal lieutenant , who promised to return about the fifteenth of september .
m de treville , being informed of this by his eminence , packed his portmanteau ; and as without knowing the cause he knew the great desire and even imperative need which his friends had of returning to paris , it goes without saying that he fixed upon them to form part of the escort .
the four young men heard the news a quarter of an hour after m. de treville , for they were the first to whom he communicated it .
it was then that dartagnan appreciated the favor the cardinal had conferred upon him in making him at last enter the musketeers -- for without that circumstance he would have been forced to remain in the camp while his companions left it .
it goes without saying that this impatience to return toward paris had for a cause the danger which mme . bonacieux would run of meeting at the convent of bethune with milady , her mortal enemy .
they had not long to wait for an answer . eight or ten days afterward aramis received the following letter :
my dear cousin , here is the authorization from my sister to withdraw our little servant from the convent of bethune , the air of which you think is bad for her .
my sister sends you this authorization with great pleasure , for she is very partial to the little girl , to whom she intends to be more serviceable hereafter .
i salute you ,
to this letter was added an order , conceived in these terms :
at the louvre , august 10 , 1628 the superior of the convent of bethune will place in the hands of the person who shall present this note to her the novice who entered the convent upon my recommendation and under my patronage .
anne
it may be easily imagined how the relationship between aramis and a seamstress who called the queen her sister amused the young men ; but aramis , after having blushed two or three times up to the whites of his eyes at the gross pleasantry of porthos , begged his friends not to revert to the subject again , declaring that if a single word more was said to him about it , he would never again implore his cousins to interfere in such affairs .
there was no further question , therefore , about marie michon among the four musketeers , who besides had what they wanted : that was , the order to withdraw mme . bonacieux from the convent of the carmelites of bethune .
their joy was great .
the lackeys were sent on before with the baggage , and they set out on the morning of the sixteenth .
the cardinal accompanied his majesty from surgeres to mauzes ; and there the king and his minister took leave of each other with great demonstrations of friendship .
the king , however , who sought distraction , while traveling as fast as possible -- for he was anxious to be in paris by the twenty - third -- stopped from time to time to fly the magpie , a pastime for which the taste had been formerly inspired in him by de luynes , and for which he had always preserved a great predilection .
out of the twenty musketeers sixteen , when this took place , rejoiced greatly at this relaxation ; but the other four cursed it heartily .
at length the escort passed through paris on the twenty - third , in the night .
the first four furloughs granted , as may be imagined , were to our four friends .
still further , athos obtained of m. de treville six days instead of four , and introduced into these six days two more nights -- for they set out on the twenty - fourth at five oclock in the evening , and as a further kindness m. de treville post - dated the leave to the morning of the twenty - fifth .
well , once returned from the country , half by the protection of her cousin , half through what we have personally done for her , we shall obtain from the queen what we desire .
myself and planchet are all that such a simple expedition requires . "
to this athos replied quietly : " we also have money left -- for i have not yet drunk all my share of the diamond , and porthos and aramis have not eaten all theirs .
we can therefore use up four horses as well as one .
but consider , dartagnan , " added he , in a tone so solemn that it made the young man shudder , " consider that bethune is a city where the cardinal has given rendezvous to a woman who , wherever she goes , brings misery with her .
" everything ! " replied athos .
dartagnan examined the countenances of his companions , which , like that of athos , wore an impression of deep anxiety ; and they continued their route as fast as their horses could carry them , but without adding another word .
on the evening of the twenty - fifth , as they were entering arras , and as dartagnan was dismounting at the inn of the golden harrow to drink a glass of wine , a horseman came out of the post yard , where he had just had a relay , started off at a gallop , and with a fresh horse took the road to paris .
at the moment he passed through the gateway into the street , the wind blew open the cloak in which he was wrapped , although it was in the month of august , and lifted his hat , which the traveler seized with his hand the moment it had left his head , pulling it eagerly over his eyes .
dartagnan , who had his eyes fixed upon this man , became very pale , and let his glass fall .
" what is the matter , monsieur ? " said planchet .
" oh , come , gentlemen , my master is ill ! "
the three friends hastened toward dartagnan , who , instead of being ill , ran toward his horse .
they stopped him at the door .
" well , where the devil are you going now ? " cried athos .
" it is he ! " cried dartagnan , pale with anger , and with the sweat on his brow , " it is he ! let me overtake him ! " " he ?
what he ? " asked athos .
" he , that man ! "
" what man ? "
" that cursed man , my evil genius , whom i have always met with when threatened by some misfortune , he who accompanied that horrible woman when i met her for the first time , he whom i was seeking when i offended our athos , he whom i saw on the very morning madame bonacieux was abducted . i have seen him ; that is he !
i recognized him when the wind blew upon his cloak . "
" the devil ! " said athos , musingly .
" to saddle , gentlemen ! to saddle ! let us pursue him , and we shall overtake him ! "
" my dear friend , " said aramis , " remember that he goes in an opposite direction from that in which we are going , that he has a fresh horse , and ours are fatigued , so that we shall disable our own horses without even a chance of overtaking him .
let the man go , dartagnan ; let us save the woman . "
" monsieur , monsieur ! " cried a hostler , running out and looking after the stranger , " monsieur , here is a paper which dropped out of your hat !
eh , monsieur , eh ! "
" friend , " said dartagnan , " a half - pistole for that paper ! "
" my faith , monsieur , with great pleasure !
here it is ! " the hostler , enchanted with the good day s work he had done , returned to the yard . dartagnan unfolded the paper .
" well ? " eagerly demanded all his three friends .
" nothing but one word ! " said dartagnan .
" yes , " said aramis , " but that one word is the name of some town or village . "
" armentieres , " read porthos ; " armentieres ?
i do nt know such a place . "
" and that name of a town or village is written in her hand ! " cried athos .
" come on , come on ! " said dartagnan ; " let us keep that paper carefully , perhaps i have not thrown away my half - pistole .
to horse , my friends , to horse ! "
and the four friends flew at a gallop along the road to bethune .
61 the carmelite convent at bethune
great criminals bear about them a kind of predestination which makes them surmount all obstacles , which makes them escape all dangers , up to the moment which a wearied providence has marked as the rock of their impious fortunes .
it was thus with milady . she escaped the cruisers of both nations , and arrived at boulogne without accident .
when landing at portsmouth , milady was an englishwoman whom the persecutions of the french drove from la rochelle ; when landing at boulogne , after a two days  passage , she passed for a frenchwoman whom the english persecuted at portsmouth out of their hatred for france .
milady had , likewise , the best of passports -- her beauty , her noble appearance , and the liberality with which she distributed her pistoles .
freed from the usual formalities by the affable smile and gallant manners of an old governor of the port , who kissed her hand , she only remained long enough at boulogne to put into the post a letter , conceived in the following terms :
" to his eminence monseigneur the cardinal richelieu , in his camp before la rochelle .
" monseigneur , let your eminence be reassured . his grace the duke of buckingham will not set out for france .
" milady de ---- " boulogne , evening of the twenty - fifth .
" p.s.--according to the desire of your eminence , i report to the convent of the carmelites at bethune , where i will await your orders . "
accordingly , that same evening milady commenced her journey . night overtook her ; she stopped , and slept at an inn . at five oclock the next morning she again proceeded , and in three hours after entered bethune .
she inquired for the convent of the carmelites , and went thither immediately .
the superior met her ; milady showed her the cardinal s order . the abbess assigned her a chamber , and had breakfast served .
all the past was effaced from the eyes of this woman ; and her looks , fixed on the future , beheld nothing but the high fortunes reserved for her by the cardinal , whom she had so successfully served without his name being in any way mixed up with the sanguinary affair .
the ever - new passions which consumed her gave to her life the appearance of those clouds which float in the heavens , reflecting sometimes azure , sometimes fire , sometimes the opaque blackness of the tempest , and which leave no traces upon the earth behind them but devastation and death .
after breakfast , the abbess came to pay her a visit . there is very little amusement in the cloister , and the good superior was eager to make the acquaintance of her new boarder .
milady wished to please the abbess . this was a very easy matter for a woman so really superior as she was . she tried to be agreeable , and she was charming , winning the good superior by her varied conversation and by the graces of her whole personality .
but the abbess contented herself with listening and smiling without replying a word .
milady , however , saw that this sort of narrative amused her very much , and kept at it ; only she now let her conversation drift toward the cardinal .
but she was greatly embarrassed . she did not know whether the abbess was a royalist or a cardinalist ; she therefore confined herself to a prudent middle course . but the abbess , on her part , maintained a reserve still more prudent , contenting herself with making a profound inclination of the head every time the fair traveler pronounced the name of his eminence .
desirous of seeing how far the discretion of the good abbess would go , she began to tell a story , obscure at first , but very circumstantial afterward , about the cardinal , relating the amours of the minister with mme . daiguillon , marion de lorme , and several other gay women .
the abbess listened more attentively , grew animated by degrees , and smiled .
" good , " thought milady ; " she takes a pleasure in my conversation . if she is a cardinalist , she has no fanaticism , at least . "
she then went on to describe the persecutions exercised by the cardinal upon his enemies .
the abbess only crossed herself , without approving or disapproving .
this confirmed milady in her opinion that the abbess was rather royalist than cardinalist .
milady therefore continued , coloring her narrations more and more .
" i am very ignorant of these matters , " said the abbess , at length ; " but however distant from the court we may be , however remote from the interests of the world we may be placed , we have very sad examples of what you have related . and one of our boarders has suffered much from the vengeance and persecution of the cardinal ! "
" one of your boarders ? " said milady ; " oh , my god ! poor woman ! i pity her , then . "
" and you have reason , for she is much to be pitied . imprisonment , menaces , ill treatment - she has suffered everything .
but after all , " resumed the abbess , " monsieur cardinal has perhaps plausible motives for acting thus ; and though she has the look of an angel , we must not always judge people by the appearance . "
" good ! " said milady to herself ; " who knows ! i am about , perhaps , to discover something here ; i am in the vein . "
she tried to give her countenance an appearance of perfect candor .
" alas , " said milady , " i know it is so . it is said that we must not trust to the face ; but in what , then , shall we place confidence , if not in the most beautiful work of the lord ?
as for me , i shall be deceived all my life perhaps , but i shall always have faith in a person whose countenance inspires me with sympathy . "
" you would , then , be tempted to believe , " said the abbess , " that this young person is innocent ? "
" the cardinal pursues not only crimes , " said she : " there are certain virtues which he pursues more severely than certain offenses . "
" permit me , madame , to express my surprise , " said the abbess .
" at what ? " said milady , with the utmost ingenuousness .
" at the language you use . "
" what do you find so astonishing in that language ? " said milady , smiling .
" you are the friend of the cardinal , for he sends you hither , and yet-- "
" and yet i speak ill of him , " replied milady , finishing the thought of the superior .
" at least you do nt speak well of him . "
" that is because i am not his friend , " said she , sighing , " but his victim ! "
" but this letter in which he recommends you to me ? "
" is an order for me to confine myself to a sort of prison , from which he will release me by one of his satellites . "
" but why have you not fled ? "
" whither should i go ? do you believe there is a spot on the earth which the cardinal can not reach if he takes the trouble to stretch forth his hand ?
if i were a man , that would barely be possible ; but what can a woman do ?
this young boarder of yours , has she tried to fly ? "
" no , that is true ; but she -- that is another thing ; i believe she is detained in france by some love affair . "
" ah , " said milady , with a sigh , " if she loves she is not altogether wretched . "
" then , " said the abbess , looking at milady with increasing interest , " i behold another poor victim ? "
" alas , yes , " said milady .
the abbess looked at her for an instant with uneasiness , as if a fresh thought suggested itself to her mind .
" you are not an enemy of our holy faith ? " said she , hesitatingly .
" who -- i ? " cried milady ; " i a protestant ?
oh , no ! i call to witness the god who hears us , that on the contrary i am a fervent catholic ! "
" then , madame , " said the abbess , smiling , " be reassured ; the house in which you are shall not be a very hard prison , and we will do all in our power to make you cherish your captivity .
you will find here , moreover , the young woman of whom i spoke , who is persecuted , no doubt , in consequence of some court intrigue .
she is amiable and well - behaved . "
" what is her name ? "
" she was sent to me by someone of high rank , under the name of kitty .
i have not tried to discover her other name . "
" kitty ! " cried milady . " what ?
are you sure ? " " that she is called so ?
yes , madame . do you know her ? "
milady smiled to herself at the idea which had occurred to her that this might be her old chambermaid .
there was connected with the remembrance of this girl a remembrance of anger ; and a desire of vengeance disordered the features of milady , which , however , immediately recovered the calm and benevolent expression which this woman of a hundred faces had for a moment allowed them to lose .
" and when can i see this young lady , for whom i already feel so great a sympathy ? " asked milady .
" why , this evening , " said the abbess ; " today even .
but you have been traveling these four days , as you told me yourself . this morning you rose at five oclock ; you must stand in need of repose .
go to bed and sleep ; at dinnertime we will rouse you . "
although milady would very willingly have gone without sleep , sustained as she was by all the excitements which a new adventure awakened in her heart , ever thirsting for intrigues , she nevertheless accepted the offer of the superior . during the last fifteen days she had experienced so many and such various emotions that if her frame of iron was still capable of supporting fatigue , her mind required repose .
she therefore took leave of the abbess , and went to bed , softly rocked by the ideas of vengeance which the name of kitty had naturally brought to her thoughts .
she remembered that almost unlimited promise which the cardinal had given her if she succeeded in her enterprise .
she had succeeded ; dartagnan was then in her power !
one thing alone frightened her ; that was the remembrance of her husband , the comte de la fere , whom she had believed dead , or at least expatriated , and whom she found again in athos - the best friend of dartagnan .
all these hopes were so many sweet thoughts for milady ; so , rocked by them , she soon fell asleep .
she was awakened by a soft voice which sounded at the foot of her bed .
she opened her eyes , and saw the abbess , accompanied by a young woman with light hair and delicate complexion , who fixed upon her a look full of benevolent curiosity .
the face of the young woman was entirely unknown to her . each examined the other with great attention , while exchanging the customary compliments ; both were very handsome , but of quite different styles of beauty .
milady , however , smiled in observing that she excelled the young woman by far in her high air and aristocratic bearing .
it is true that the habit of a novice , which the young woman wore , was not very advantageous in a contest of this kind .
the abbess introduced them to each other . when this formality was ended , as her duties called her to chapel , she left the two young women alone .
the novice , seeing milady in bed , was about to follow the example of the superior ; but milady stopped her .
" how , madame , " said she , " i have scarcely seen you , and you already wish to deprive me of your company , upon which i had counted a little , i must confess , for the time i have to pass here ? "
" no , madame , " replied the novice , " only i thought i had chosen my time ill ; you were asleep , you are fatigued . "
" well , " said milady , " what can those who sleep wish for -- a happy awakening ?
this awakening you have given me ; allow me , then , to enjoy it at my ease , " and taking her hand , she drew her toward the armchair by the bedside .
the novice sat down .
" how , you are going soon ? " asked milady .
" at least i hope so , " said the novice , with an expression of joy which she made no effort to disguise .
" i think i learned you had suffered persecutions from the cardinal , " continued milady ; " that would have been another motive for sympathy between us . "
" what i have heard , then , from our good mother is true ; you have likewise been a victim of that wicked priest . "
" hush ! " said milady ; " let us not , even here , speak thus of him . all my misfortunes arise from my having said nearly what you have said before a woman whom i thought my friend , and who betrayed me .
are you also the victim of a treachery ? "
" no , " said the novice , " but of my devotion -- of a devotion to a woman i loved , for whom i would have laid down my life , for whom i would give it still . "
" and who has abandoned you -- is that it ? "
but you , madame , you appear to be free , " continued the novice ; " and if you were inclined to fly it only rests with yourself to do so . "
" whither would you have me go , without friends , without money , in a part of france with which i am unacquainted , and where i have never been before ? "
" oh , " cried the novice , " as to friends , you would have them wherever you want , you appear so good and are so beautiful ! "
" that does not prevent , " replied milady , softening her smile so as to give it an angelic expression , " my being alone or being persecuted . "
i have proof that her majesty , notwithstanding her excellent heart , has more than once been obliged to abandon to the anger of his eminence persons who had served her . " " trust me , madame ; the queen may appear to have abandoned those persons , but we must not put faith in appearances .
" alas ! " said milady , " i believe so ; the queen is so good ! "
" oh , you know her , then , that lovely and noble queen , that you speak of her thus ! " cried the novice , with enthusiasm .
" that is to say , " replied milady , driven into her entrenchment , " that i have not the honor of knowing her personally ; but i know a great number of her most intimate friends . i am acquainted with monsieur de putange ; i met monsieur dujart in england ; i know monsieur de treville . "
" monsieur de treville ! " exclaimed the novice , " do you know monsieur de treville ? "
" yes , perfectly well -- intimately even . "
" the captain of the king s musketeers ? "
" the captain of the king s musketeers . "
" often ! " said milady , who , having entered this track , and perceiving that falsehood succeeded , was determined to follow it to the end .
" with him , then , you must have seen some of his musketeers ? "
" all those he is in the habit of receiving ! " replied milady , for whom this conversation began to have a real interest .
" name a few of those whom you know , and you will see if they are my friends . "
" well ! " said milady , embarrassed , " i know monsieur de louvigny , monsieur de courtivron , monsieur de ferussac . "
the novice let her speak , then seeing that she paused , she said , " do nt you know a gentleman named athos ? "
milady became as pale as the sheets in which she was lying , and mistress as she was of herself , could not help uttering a cry , seizing the hand of the novice , and devouring her with looks .
" what is the matter ?
good god ! " asked the poor woman , " have i said anything that has wounded you ? "
" no ; but the name struck me , because i also have known that gentleman , and it appeared strange to me to meet with a person who appears to know him well . "
" oh , yes , very well ; not only him , but some of his friends , messieurs porthos and aramis ! "
" indeed ! you know them likewise ? i know them , " cried milady , who began to feel a chill penetrate her heart .
" well , if you know them , you know that they are good and free companions . why do you not apply to them , if you stand in need of help ? "
" that is to say , " stammered milady , " i am not really very intimate with any of them . i know them from having heard one of their friends , monsieur dartagnan , say a great deal about them . "
" you know monsieur dartagnan ! " cried the novice , in her turn seizing the hands of milady and devouring her with her eyes .
" why , " replied milady , embarrassed , " why , by the title of friend . "
" you deceive me , madame , " said the novice ; " you have been his mistress ! "
" it is you who have been his mistress , madame ! " cried milady , in her turn .
" i ? " said the novice .
" yes , you ! i know you now . you are madame bonacieux ! "
the young woman drew back , filled with surprise and terror .
" oh , do not deny it ! answer ! " continued milady .
" well , yes , madame , " said the novice , " are we rivals ? "
the countenance of milady was illumined by so savage a joy that under any other circumstances mme . bonacieux would have fled in terror ; but she was absorbed by jealousy .
" speak , madame ! " resumed mme . bonacieux , with an energy of which she might not have been believed capable . " have you been , or are you , his mistress ? "
" oh , no ! " cried milady , with an accent that admitted no doubt of her truth .
" never , never ! " " i believe you , " said mme . bonacieux ; " but why , then , did you cry out so ? "
" do you not understand ? " said milady , who had already overcome her agitation and recovered all her presence of mind .
" how can i understand ? i know nothing . "
" can you not understand that monsieur dartagnan , being my friend , might take me into his confidence ? "
" truly ? "
" do you not perceive that i know all -- your abduction from the little house at st . germain , his despair , that of his friends , and their useless inquiries up to this moment ?
how could i help being astonished when , without having the least expectation of such a thing , i meet you face to face -- you , of whom we have so often spoken together , you whom he loves with all his soul , you whom he had taught me to love before i had seen you !
ah , dear constance , i have found you , then ; i see you at last ! "
and milady stretched out her arms to mme . bonacieux , who , convinced by what she had just said , saw nothing in this woman whom an instant before she had believed her rival but a sincere and devoted friend .
" oh , pardon me , pardon me ! " cried she , sinking upon the shoulders of milady . " pardon me , i love him so much ! "
these two women held each other for an instant in a close embrace .
certainly , if milady s strength had been equal to her hatred , mme . bonacieux would never have left that embrace alive .
but not being able to stifle her , she smiled upon her .
" oh , you beautiful , good little creature ! " said milady .
" how delighted i am to have found you !
" oh , yes it is you indeed !
from what he has told me , i know you now . i recognize you perfectly . "
the poor young woman could not possibly suspect what frightful cruelty was behind the rampart of that pure brow , behind those brilliant eyes in which she read nothing but interest and compassion .
" then you know what i have suffered , " said mme . bonacieux , " since he has told you what he has suffered ; but to suffer for him is happiness . "
milady replied mechanically , " yes , that is happiness . "
she was thinking of something else .
" and then , " continued mme . bonacieux , " my punishment is drawing to a close .
" this evening ? " asked milady , roused from her reverie by these words . " what do you mean ?
do you expect news from him ? "
" i expect himself . " " himself ?
" himself ! "
" but that s impossible ! he is at the siege of la rochelle with the cardinal . he will not return till after the taking of the city . "
" ah , you fancy so ! but is there anything impossible for my dartagnan , the noble and loyal gentleman ? "
" oh , i can not believe you ! "
" well , read , then ! " said the unhappy young woman , in the excess of her pride and joy , presenting a letter to milady .
" the writing of madame de chevreuse ! " said milady to herself .
" ah , i always thought there was some secret understanding in that quarter ! "
and she greedily read the following few lines :
my dear child , hold yourself ready . our friend will see you soon , and he will only see you to release you from that imprisonment in which your safety required you should be concealed . prepare , then , for your departure , and never despair of us .
our charming gascon has just proved himself as brave and faithful as ever . tell him that certain parties are grateful for the warning he has given .
" yes , yes , " said milady ; " the letter is precise .
do you know what that warning was ? "
" no , i only suspect he has warned the queen against some fresh machinations of the cardinal . "
" yes , that s it , no doubt ! " said milady , returning the letter to mme . bonacieux , and letting her head sink pensively upon her bosom .
at that moment they heard the gallop of a horse .
" oh ! " cried mme . bonacieux , darting to the window , " can it be he ? "
milady remained still in bed , petrified by surprise ; so many unexpected things happened to her all at once that for the first time she was at a loss .
" he , he ! " murmured she ; " can it be he ? "
and she remained in bed with her eyes fixed .
" alas , no ! " said mme . bonacieux ; " it is a man i do nt know , although he seems to be coming here . yes , he checks his pace ; he stops at the gate ; he rings . "
milady sprang out of bed .
" you are sure it is not he ? " said she .
" yes , yes , very sure ! "
" perhaps you did not see well . "
" oh , if i were to see the plume of his hat , the end of his cloak , i should know him ! "
milady was dressing herself all the time .
" yes , he has entered . "
" it is for you or me ! "
" my god , how agitated you seem ! "
" yes , i admit it .
i have not your confidence ; i fear the cardinal . "
" hush ! " said mme . bonacieux ; " somebody is coming . "
immediately the door opened , and the superior entered .
" did you come from boulogne ? " demanded she of milady .
" yes , " replied she , trying to recover her self - possession . " who wants me ? "
" a man who will not tell his name , but who comes from the cardinal . "
" and who wishes to speak with me ? "
" who wishes to speak to a lady recently come from boulogne . "
" then let him come in , if you please . "
" oh , my god , my god ! " cried mme . bonacieux . " can it be bad news ? "
" i fear it . "
" i will leave you with this stranger ; but as soon as he is gone , if you will permit me , i will return . "
" permit you ? i beseech you . "
the superior and mme . bonacieux retired .
milady remained alone , with her eyes fixed upon the door . an instant later , the jingling of spurs was heard upon the stairs , steps drew near , the door opened , and a man appeared .
milady uttered a cry of joy ; this man was the comte de rochefort -- the demoniacal tool of his eminence .
62 two varieties of demons
ah , " cried milady and rochefort together , " it is you ! "
" yes , it is i. "
" and you come ? " asked milady .
" from la rochelle ; and you ? "
" from england . "
" buckingham ? "
" dead or desperately wounded , as i left without having been able to hear anything of him . a fanatic has just assassinated him . "
" i wrote to him from boulogne .
but what brings you here ? "
" his eminence was uneasy , and sent me to find you . "
" i only arrived yesterday . "
" and what have you been doing since yesterday ? "
" i have not lost my time . "
" oh , i do nt doubt that . "
" do you know whom i have encountered here ? "
" no . "
" guess . "
" how can i ? "
" that young woman whom the queen took out of prison . "
" the mistress of that fellow dartagnan ? "
" yes ; madame bonacieux , with whose retreat the cardinal was unacquainted . "
" well , well , " said rochefort , " here is a chance which may pair off with the other ! monsieur cardinal is indeed a privileged man ! "
" imagine my astonishment , " continued milady , " when i found myself face to face with this woman ! "
" does she know you ? "
" no . "
" then she looks upon you as a stranger ? "
milady smiled .
" i am her best friend . "
" upon my honor , " said rochefort , " it takes you , my dear countess , to perform such miracles ! "
" and it is well i can , chevalier , " said milady , " for do you know what is going on here ? "
" no . "
" they will come for her tomorrow or the day after , with an order from the queen . "
" indeed ! and who ? "
" dartagnan and his friends . "
" indeed , they will go so far that we shall be obliged to send them to the bastille . "
" why is it not done already ? " " what would you ?
the cardinal has a weakness for these men which i can not comprehend . "
" indeed ! "
" yes . "
" but these four men must be now at the siege of la rochelle ? "
" i thought so , too ; but a letter which madame bonacieux has received from madame the constable , and which she has had the imprudence to show me , leads me to believe that these four men , on the contrary , are on the road hither to take her away . " " the devil !
what s to be done ? "
" what did the cardinal say about me ? "
" i was to take your dispatches , written or verbal , and return by post ; and when he shall know what you have done , he will advise what you have to do . "
" i must , then , remain here ? " " here , or in the neighborhood . "
" you can not take me with you ? "
" no , the order is imperative .
near the camp you might be recognized ; and your presence , you must be aware , would compromise the cardinal . " " then i must wait here , or in the neighborhood ? "
" only tell me beforehand where you will wait for intelligence from the cardinal ; let me know always where to find you . "
" observe , it is probable that i may not be able to remain here . "
" why ? "
" you forget that my enemies may arrive at any minute . "
" that s true ; but is this little woman , then , to escape his eminence ? "
" bah ! " said milady , with a smile that belonged only to herself ; " you forget that i am her best friend . "
" ah , that s true ! i may then tell the cardinal , with respect to this little woman-- "
" that he may be at ease . "
" is that all ? "
" he will know what that means . "
" he will guess , at least .
now , then , what had i better do ? "
" return instantly . it appears to me that the news you bear is worth the trouble of a little diligence . "
" my chaise broke down coming into lilliers . "
" capital ! "
" what , capital ? "
" yes , i want your chaise . "
" and how shall i travel , then ? "
" on horseback . "
" you talk very comfortably,--a hundred and eighty leagues ! "
" one can do it !
" afterward ?
why , in passing through lilliers you will send me your chaise , with an order to your servant to place himself at my disposal . "
" well . "
" you have , no doubt , some order from the cardinal about you ? "
" i have my full power . "
" show it to the abbess , and tell her that someone will come and fetch me , either today or tomorrow , and that i am to follow the person who presents himself in your name . "
" very well . "
" do nt forget to treat me harshly in speaking of me to the abbess . "
" to what purpose ? "
" i am a victim of the cardinal .
it is necessary to inspire confidence in that poor little madame bonacieux . "
" that s true .
now , will you make me a report of all that has happened ? "
" why , i have related the events to you . you have a good memory ; repeat what i have told you .
" that s correct ; wait ! "
" do you want a map ? "
" oh , i know this country marvelously ! "
" you ? when were you here ? "
" i was brought up here . "
" truly ? "
" it is worth something , you see , to have been brought up somewhere . "
" you will wait for me , then ? "
" let me reflect a little ! ay , that will do -- at armentieres . "
" where is that armentieres ? "
" a little town on the lys ; i shall only have to cross the river , and i shall be in a foreign country . "
" capital ! but it is understood you will only cross the river in case of danger . "
" that is well understood . "
" and in that case , how shall i know where you are ? "
" you do not want your lackey ? " " is he a sure man ? "
" to the proof . "
" give him to me .
nobody knows him .
i will leave him at the place i quit , and he will conduct you to me . "
" and you say you will wait for me at armentieres ? "
" at armentieres . "
" write that name on a bit of paper , lest i should forget it . there is nothing compromising in the name of a town . is it not so ? "
" eh , who knows ?
never mind , " said milady , writing the name on half a sheet of paper ; " i will compromise myself . "
now , is that all ? "
" i believe so . "
is that all , then ? "
" in truth , my dear chevalier , you are a miracle of memory .
" what ? "
" you think of everything . "
" and you forget one thing . "
" what ? "
" to ask me if i want money . "
" that s true . how much do you want ? "
" all you have in gold . "
" i have five hundred pistoles , or thereabouts . "
" i have as much . with a thousand pistoles one may face everything .
empty your pockets . "
" there . " " right . and you go-- "
" in an hour -- time to eat a morsel , during which i shall send for a post horse . "
" capital !
adieu , chevalier . "
" adieu , countess . "
" commend me to the cardinal . "
" commend me to satan . "
milady and rochefort exchanged a smile and separated .
an hour afterward rochefort set out at a grand gallop ; five hours after that he passed through arras .
our readers already know how he was recognized by dartagnan , and how that recognition by inspiring fear in the four musketeers had given fresh activity to their journey .
63 the drop of water
rochefort had scarcely departed when mme . bonacieux re - entered .
she found milady with a smiling countenance .
" well , " said the young woman , " what you dreaded has happened . this evening , or tomorrow , the cardinal will send someone to take you away . "
" who told you that , my dear ? " asked milady .
" i heard it from the mouth of the messenger himself . "
" come and sit down close to me , " said milady .
" here i am . "
" wait till i assure myself that nobody hears us . "
" why all these precautions ? "
" you shall know . "
milady arose , went to the door , opened it , looked in the corridor , and then returned and seated herself close to mme . bonacieux .
" then , " said she , " he has well played his part . "
" who has ? "
" he who just now presented himself to the abbess as a messenger from the cardinal . "
" it was , then , a part he was playing ? "
" yes , my child . "
" that man , then , was not-- "
" that man , " said milady , lowering her voice , " is my brother . "
" your brother ! " cried mme . bonacieux .
" no one must know this secret , my dear , but yourself . if you reveal it to anyone in the world , i shall be lost , and perhaps yourself likewise . "
" oh , my god ! "
" listen . this is what has happened : my brother , who was coming to my assistance to take me away by force if it were necessary , met with the emissary of the cardinal , who was coming in search of me .
he followed him . at a solitary and retired part of the road he drew his sword , and required the messenger to deliver up to him the papers of which he was the bearer . the messenger resisted ; my brother killed him . "
" oh ! " said mme . bonacieux , shuddering .
" remember , that was the only means .
then my brother determined to substitute cunning for force . he took the papers , and presented himself here as the emissary of the cardinal , and in an hour or two a carriage will come to take me away by the orders of his eminence . " " i understand .
it is your brother who sends this carriage . " " exactly ; but that is not all .
that letter you have received , and which you believe to be from madame de chevreuse-- "
" well ? "
" it is a forgery . "
" how can that be ? "
" yes , a forgery ; it is a snare to prevent your making any resistance when they come to fetch you . "
" but it is dartagnan that will come . "
" do not deceive yourself . dartagnan and his friends are detained at the siege of la rochelle . "
" how do you know that ? "
" my brother met some emissaries of the cardinal in the uniform of musketeers .
you would have been summoned to the gate ; you would have believed yourself about to meet friends ; you would have been abducted , and conducted back to paris . "
" oh , my god ! my senses fail me amid such a chaos of iniquities .
i feel , if this continues , " said mme . bonacieux , raising her hands to her forehead , " i shall go mad ! "
" stop-- "
" what ? "
" i hear a horse s steps ; it is my brother setting off again . i should like to offer him a last salute . come ! "
milady opened the window , and made a sign to mme . bonacieux to join her .
the young woman complied .
rochefort passed at a gallop .
" adieu , brother ! " cried milady .
the chevalier raised his head , saw the two young women , and without stopping , waved his hand in a friendly way to milady .
" the good george ! " said she , closing the window with an expression of countenance full of affection and melancholy .
and she resumed her seat , as if plunged in reflections entirely personal .
" dear lady , " said mme . bonacieux , " pardon me for interrupting you ; but what do you advise me to do ? good heaven !
you have more experience than i have . speak ; i will listen . "
" in the first place , " said milady , " it is possible i may be deceived , and that dartagnan and his friends may really come to your assistance . "
" oh , that would be too much ! " cried mme . bonacieux , " so much happiness is not in store for me ! "
" then you comprehend it would be only a question of time , a sort of race , which should arrive first .
if your friends are the more speedy , you are to be saved ; if the satellites of the cardinal , you are lost . "
" oh , yes , yes ; lost beyond redemption !
what , then , to do ? what to do ? "
" there would be a very simple means , very natural-- "
" tell me what ! "
" to wait , concealed in the neighborhood , and assure yourself who are the men who come to ask for you . "
" but where can i wait ? "
" oh , there is no difficulty in that . i shall stop and conceal myself a few leagues hence until my brother can rejoin me . well , i take you with me ; we conceal ourselves , and wait together . "
" but i shall not be allowed to go ; i am almost a prisoner . "
" as they believe that i go in consequence of an order from the cardinal , no one will believe you anxious to follow me . "
" well ? "
" well ! the carriage is at the door ; you bid me adieu ; you mount the step to embrace me a last time ; my brother s servant , who comes to fetch me , is told how to proceed ; he makes a sign to the postillion , and we set off at a gallop . "
" but dartagnan ! dartagnan ! if he comes ? "
" shall we not know it ? "
" how ? "
" nothing easier .
we will send my brother s servant back to bethune , whom , as i told you , we can trust . he shall assume a disguise , and place himself in front of the convent . if the emissaries of the cardinal arrive , he will take no notice ; if it is monsieur dartagnan and his friends , he will bring them to us . "
" he knows them , then ? "
" doubtless . has he not seen monsieur dartagnan at my house ? "
" oh , yes , yes ; you are right . thus all may go well -- all may be for the best ; but we do not go far from this place ? "
" seven or eight leagues at the most . we will keep on the frontiers , for instance ; and at the first alarm we can leave france . "
" and what can we do there ? "
" wait . "
" but if they come ? "
" my brother s carriage will be here first . "
" if i should happen to be any distance from you when the carriage comes for you -- at dinner or supper , for instance ? "
" do one thing . "
" what is that ? "
" tell your good superior that in order that we may be as much together as possible , you ask her permission to share my repast . "
" will she permit it ? "
" what inconvenience can it be ? "
" oh , delightful ! in this way we shall not be separated for an instant . "
" well , go down to her , then , to make your request . i feel my head a little confused ; i will take a turn in the garden . "
" go and where shall i find you ? "
" here , in an hour . "
" here , in an hour . oh , you are so kind , and i am so grateful ! "
are you not the beloved of one of my best friends ? "
" dear dartagnan ! oh , how he will thank you ! "
" i hope so .
now , then , all is agreed ; let us go down . "
" you are going into the garden ? "
" yes . "
" go along this corridor , down a little staircase , and you are in it . "
" excellent ; thank you ! "
and the two women parted , exchanging charming smiles .
milady had told the truth -- her head was confused , for her ill - arranged plans clashed one another like chaos .
she required to be alone that she might put her thoughts a little into order .
she saw vaguely the future ; but she stood in need of a little silence and quiet to give all her ideas , as yet confused , a distinct form and a regular plan .
what was most pressing was to get mme . bonacieux away , and convey her to a place of safety , and there , if matters required , make her a hostage .
milady began to have doubts of the issue of this terrible duel , in which her enemies showed as much perseverance as she did animosity .
besides , she felt as we feel when a storm is coming on -- that this issue was near , and could not fail to be terrible .
the principal thing for her , then , was , as we have said , to keep mme . bonacieux in her power .
mme . bonacieux was the very life of dartagnan . this was more than his life , the life of the woman he loved ; this was , in case of ill fortune , a means of temporizing and obtaining good conditions .
now , this point was settled ; mme . bonacieux , without any suspicion , accompanied her . once concealed with her at armentieres , it would be easy to make her believe that dartagnan had not come to bethune .
in fifteen days at most , rochefort would be back ; besides , during that fifteen days she would have time to think how she could best avenge herself on the four friends .
she would not be weary , thank god ! for she should enjoy the sweetest pastime such events could accord a woman of her character -- perfecting a beautiful vengeance .
revolving all this in her mind , she cast her eyes around her , and arranged the topography of the garden in her head .
milady was like a good general who contemplates at the same time victory and defeat , and who is quite prepared , according to the chances of the battle , to march forward or to beat a retreat .
at the end of an hour she heard a soft voice calling her ; it was mme . bonacieux s .
the good abbess had naturally consented to her request ; and as a commencement , they were to sup together .
on reaching the courtyard , they heard the noise of a carriage which stopped at the gate . milady listened .
" do you hear anything ? " said she .
" yes , the rolling of a carriage . "
" it is the one my brother sends for us . "
" oh , my god ! "
" come , come ! courage ! "
the bell of the convent gate was sounded ; milady was not mistaken .
" go to your chamber , " said she to mme . bonacieux ; " you have perhaps some jewels you would like to take . "
" i have his letters , " said she .
" well , go and fetch them , and come to my apartment . we will snatch some supper ; we shall perhaps travel part of the night , and must keep our strength up . "
" great god ! " said mme . bonacieux , placing her hand upon her bosom , " my heart beats so i can not walk . "
" courage , courage ! remember that in a quarter of an hour you will be safe ; and think that what you are about to do is for his sake . "
" yes , yes , everything for him .
you have restored my courage by a single word ; go , i will rejoin you . "
milady ran up to her apartment quickly ; she there found rochefort s lackey , and gave him his instructions .
in this case milady would cross the garden and gain the village on foot . as we have already said , milady was admirably acquainted with this part of france .
mme . bonacieux came in ; and to remove all suspicion , if she had any , milady repeated to the lackey , before her , the latter part of her instructions .
milady asked some questions about the carriage . it was a chaise drawn by three horses , driven by a postillion ; rochefort s lackey would precede it , as courier .
milady was wrong in fearing that mme . bonacieux would have any suspicion . the poor young woman was too pure to suppose that any female could be guilty of such perfidy ; besides , the name of the comtesse de winter , which she had heard the abbess pronounce , was wholly unknown to her , and she was even ignorant that a woman had had so great and so fatal a share in the misfortune of her life .
" you see , " said she , when the lackey had gone out , " everything is ready .
the abbess suspects nothing , and believes that i am taken by order of the cardinal .
this man goes to give his last orders ; take the least thing , drink a finger of wine , and let us be gone . "
" yes , " said mme . bonacieux , mechanically , " yes , let us be gone . "
milady made her a sign to sit down opposite , poured her a small glass of spanish wine , and helped her to the wing of a chicken .
" see , " said she , " if everything does not second us ! here is night coming on ; by daybreak we shall have reached our retreat , and nobody can guess where we are .
come , courage ! take something . "
mme . bonacieux ate a few mouthfuls mechanically , and just touched the glass with her lips .
" come , come ! " said milady , lifting hers to her mouth , " do as i do . "
this noise acted upon her joy like the storm which awakens the sleeper in the midst of a happy dream ; she grew pale and ran to the window , while mme . bonacieux , rising all in a tremble , supported herself upon her chair to avoid falling .
nothing was yet to be seen , only they heard the galloping draw nearer .
" oh , my god ! " said mme . bonacieux , " what is that noise ? "
" that of either our friends or our enemies , " said milady , with her terrible coolness . " stay where you are , i will tell you . "
mme . bonacieux remained standing , mute , motionless , and pale as a statue .
the noise became louder ; the horses could not be more than a hundred and fifty paces distant . if they were not yet to be seen , it was because the road made an elbow .
the noise became so distinct that the horses might be counted by the rattle of their hoofs .
milady gazed with all the power of her attention ; it was just light enough for her to see who was coming .
all at once , at the turning of the road she saw the glitter of laced hats and the waving of feathers ; she counted two , then five , then eight horsemen . one of them preceded the rest by double the length of his horse .
milady uttered a stifled groan .
in the first horseman she recognized dartagnan .
" oh , my god , my god , " cried mme . bonacieux , " what is it ? "
" it is the uniform of the cardinal s guards . not an instant to be lost !
fly , fly ! "
" yes , yes , let us fly ! " repeated mme . bonacieux , but without being able to make a step , glued as she was to the spot by terror .
they heard the horsemen pass under the windows .
" come , then , come , then ! " cried milady , trying to drag the young woman along by the arm .
" thanks to the garden , we yet can flee ; i have the key , but make haste ! in five minutes it will be too late ! "
mme . bonacieux tried to walk , made two steps , and sank upon her knees .
milady tried to raise and carry her , but could not do it .
at this moment they heard the rolling of the carriage , which at the approach of the musketeers set off at a gallop .
then three or four shots were fired .
" for the last time , will you come ? " cried milady .
" oh , my god , my god ! you see my strength fails me ; you see plainly i can not walk . flee alone ! "
" flee alone , and leave you here ? no , no , never ! " cried milady .
it was a grain of a reddish color , which dissolved immediately .
then , taking the glass with a firm hand , she said , " drink .
" this is not the way that i wished to avenge myself , " said milady , replacing the glass upon the table , with an infernal smile , " but , my faith ! we do what we can ! "
and she rushed out of the room .
mme . bonacieux saw her go without being able to follow her ; she was like people who dream they are pursued , and who in vain try to walk .
a few moments passed ; a great noise was heard at the gate . every instant mme . bonacieux expected to see milady , but she did not return .
several times , with terror , no doubt , the cold sweat burst from her burning brow .
at length she heard the grating of the hinges of the opening gates ; the noise of boots and spurs resounded on the stairs . there was a great murmur of voices which continued to draw near , amid which she seemed to hear her own name pronounced .
all at once she uttered a loud cry of joy , and darted toward the door ; she had recognized the voice of dartagnan .
" dartagnan ! dartagnan ! " cried she , " is it you ?
this way ! this way ! "
" constance ? constance ? " replied the young man , " where are you ? where are you ?
my god ! " at the same moment the door of the cell yielded to a shock , rather than opened ; several men rushed into the chamber . mme . bonacieux had sunk into an armchair , without the power of moving .
dartagnan threw down a yet - smoking pistol which he held in his hand , and fell on his knees before his mistress . athos replaced his in his belt ; porthos and aramis , who held their drawn swords in their hands , returned them to their scabbards .
" oh , dartagnan , my beloved dartagnan ! you have come , then , at last ! you have not deceived me ! it is indeed thee ! "
" yes , yes , constance . reunited ! "
" oh , it was in vain she told me you would not come ! i hoped in silence . i was not willing to fly . oh , i have done well ! how happy i am ! "
at this word she , athos , who had seated himself quietly , started up .
" she ! what she ? " asked dartagnan .
" why , my companion . she who out of friendship for me wished to take me from my persecutors . she who , mistaking you for the cardinal s guards , has just fled away . "
" your companion ! " cried dartagnan , becoming more pale than the white veil of his mistress . " of what companion are you speaking , dear constance ? "
" of her whose carriage was at the gate ; of a woman who calls herself your friend ; of a woman to whom you have told everything . "
" her name , her name ! " cried dartagnan . " my god , can you not remember her name ? "
" yes , it was pronounced in my hearing once . stop -- but -- it is very strange -- oh , my god , my head swims !
i can not see ! " " help , help , my friends ! her hands are icy cold , " cried dartagnan . " she is ill ! great god , she is losing her senses ! "
" oh ! " said athos , " oh , no , it is impossible !
god would not permit such a crime ! "
" water , water ! " cried dartagnan . " water ! "
" oh , poor woman , poor woman ! " murmured athos , in a broken voice .
mme . bonacieux opened her eyes under the kisses of dartagnan .
" she revives ! " cried the young man .
" oh , my god , my god , i thank thee ! "
" madame ! " said athos , " madame , in the name of heaven , whose empty glass is this ? "
" mine , monsieur , " said the young woman , in a dying voice .
" but who poured the wine for you that was in this glass ? "
" she . "
" but who is she ? "
" oh , i remember ! " said mme . bonacieux , " the comtesse de winter . "
the four friends uttered one and the same cry , but that of athos dominated all the rest .
at that moment the countenance of mme . bonacieux became livid ; a fearful agony pervaded her frame , and she sank panting into the arms of porthos and aramis .
dartagnan seized the hands of athos with an anguish difficult to be described .
" and what do you believe ? 
his voice was stifled by sobs .
" i believe everything , " said athos biting his lips till the blood sprang to avoid sighing .
" dartagnan , dartagnan ! " cried mme . bonacieux , " where art thou ? do not leave me ! you see i am dying ! "
dartagnan released the hands of athos which he still held clasped in both his own , and hastened to her .
her beautiful face was distorted with agony ; her glassy eyes had no longer their sight ; a convulsive shuddering shook her whole body ; the sweat rolled from her brow .
" in the name of heaven , run , call ! aramis ! porthos ! call for help ! "
" useless ! " said athos , " useless ! for the poison which she pours there is no antidote . "
" yes , yes ! help , help ! " murmured mme . bonacieux ; " help ! "
then , collecting all her strength , she took the head of the young man between her hands , looked at him for an instant as if her whole soul passed into that look , and with a sobbing cry pressed her lips to his .
" constance , constance ! " cried dartagnan .
a sigh escaped from the mouth of mme . bonacieux , and dwelt for an instant on the lips of dartagnan . that sigh was the soul , so chaste and so loving , which reascended to heaven .
dartagnan pressed nothing but a corpse in his arms .
the young man uttered a cry , and fell by the side of his mistress as pale and as icy as herself .
porthos wept ; aramis pointed toward heaven ; athos made the sign of the cross .
at that moment a man appeared in the doorway , almost as pale as those in the chamber . he looked around him and saw mme . bonacieux dead , and dartagnan in a swoon .
he appeared just at that moment of stupor which follows great catastrophes .
" i was not deceived , " said he ; " here is monsieur dartagnan ; and you are his friends , messieurs athos , porthos , and aramis . "
the persons whose names were thus pronounced looked at the stranger with astonishment . it seemed to all three that they knew him .
" gentlemen , " resumed the newcomer , " you are , as i am , in search of a woman who , " added he , with a terrible smile , " must have passed this way , for i see a corpse . "
the three friends remained mute -- for although the voice as well as the countenance reminded them of someone they had seen , they could not remember under what circumstances .
" gentlemen , " continued the stranger , " since you do not recognize a man who probably owes his life to you twice , i must name myself . i am lord de winter , brother - in - law of that woman . "
the three friends uttered a cry of surprise .
" i set out five hours after her from portsmouth , " said lord de winter .
and yet it appears , in spite of all your diligence , you have arrived too late . "
" you see ! " said athos , pointing to mme . bonacieux dead , and to dartagnan , whom porthos and aramis were trying to recall to life .
" are they both dead ? " asked lord de winter , sternly .
" no , " replied athos , " fortunately monsieur dartagnan has only fainted . "
" ah , indeed , so much the better ! " said lord de winter .
at that moment dartagnan opened his eyes .
he tore himself from the arms of porthos and aramis , and threw himself like a madman on the corpse of his mistress .
athos rose , walked toward his friend with a slow and solemn step , embraced him tenderly , and as he burst into violent sobs , he said to him with his noble and persuasive voice , " friend , be a man !
women weep for the dead ; men avenge them ! "
" oh , yes ! " cried dartagnan , " yes ! if it be to avenge her , i am ready to follow you . "
athos profited by this moment of strength which the hope of vengeance restored to his unfortunate friend to make a sign to porthos and aramis to go and fetch the superior .
the two friends met her in the corridor , greatly troubled and much upset by such strange events ; she called some of the nuns , who against all monastic custom found themselves in the presence of five men .
" madame , " said athos , passing his arm under that of dartagnan , " we abandon to your pious care the body of that unfortunate woman .
she was an angel on earth before being an angel in heaven .
treat her as one of your sisters . we will return someday to pray over her grave . "
dartagnan concealed his face in the bosom of athos , and sobbed aloud .
" weep , " said athos , " weep , heart full of love , youth , and life !
alas , would i could weep like you ! " and he drew away his friend , as affectionate as a father , as consoling as a priest , noble as a man who has suffered much .
all five , followed by their lackeys leading their horses , took their way to the town of bethune , whose outskirts they perceived , and stopped before the first inn they came to .
" but , " said dartagnan , " shall we not pursue that woman ? "
" later , " said athos . " i have measures to take . "
" she will escape us , " replied the young man ; " she will escape us , and it will be your fault , athos . "
" i will be accountable for her , " said athos .
dartagnan had so much confidence in the word of his friend that he lowered his head , and entered the inn without reply .
porthos and aramis regarded each other , not understanding this assurance of athos .
lord de winter believed he spoke in this manner to soothe the grief of dartagnan .
" now , gentlemen , " said athos , when he had ascertained there were five chambers free in the hotel , " let everyone retire to his own apartment . dartagnan needs to be alone , to weep and to sleep .
i take charge of everything ; be easy . "
" it appears , however , " said lord de winter , " if there are any measures to take against the countess , it concerns me ; she is my sister - in - law . "
" and me , " said athos , " --she is my wife ! "
dartagnan smiled -- for he understood that athos was sure of his vengeance when he revealed such a secret . porthos and aramis looked at each other , and grew pale .
lord de winter thought athos was mad .
" now , retire to your chambers , " said athos , " and leave me to act . you must perceive that in my quality of a husband this concerns me .
only , dartagnan , if you have not lost it , give me the paper which fell from that man s hat , upon which is written the name of the village of-- "
" ah , " said dartagnan , " i comprehend ! that name written in her hand . "
" you see , then , " said athos , " there is a god in heaven still ! "
64 the man in the red cloak
the despair of athos had given place to a concentrated grief which only rendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinary man .
possessed by one single thought -- that of the promise he had made , and of the responsibility he had taken -- he retired last to his chamber , begged the host to procure him a map of the province , bent over it , examined every line traced upon it , perceived that there were four different roads from bethune to armentieres , and summoned the lackeys .
planchet , grimaud , bazin , and mousqueton presented themselves , and received clear , positive , and serious orders from athos .
they must set out the next morning at daybreak , and go to armentieres -- each by a different route .
planchet , the most intelligent of the four , was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon which the four friends had fired , and which was accompanied , as may be remembered , by rochefort s servant .
athos set the lackeys to work first because , since these men had been in the service of himself and his friends he had discovered in each of them different and essential qualities . then , lackeys who ask questions inspire less mistrust than masters , and meet with more sympathy among those to whom they address themselves .
besides , milady knew the masters , and did not know the lackeys ; on the contrary , the lackeys knew milady perfectly .
all four were to meet the next day at eleven oclock . if they had discovered milady s retreat , three were to remain on guard ; the fourth was to return to bethune in order to inform athos and serve as a guide to the four friends .
these arrangements made , the lackeys retired .
athos then arose from his chair , girded on his sword , enveloped himself in his cloak , and left the hotel . it was nearly ten oclock . at ten oclock in the evening , it is well known , the streets in provincial towns are very little frequented .
athos nevertheless was visibly anxious to find someone of whom he could ask a question .
at length he met a belated passenger , went up to him , and spoke a few words to him . the man he addressed recoiled with terror , and only answered the few words of the musketeer by pointing .
athos offered the man half a pistole to accompany him , but the man refused .
athos then plunged into the street the man had indicated with his finger ; but arriving at four crossroads , he stopped again , visibly embarrassed .
nevertheless , as the crossroads offered him a better chance than any other place of meeting somebody , he stood still .
in a few minutes a night watch passed .
athos repeated to him the same question he had asked the first person he met . the night watch evinced the same terror , refused , in his turn , to accompany athos , and only pointed with his hand to the road he was to take .
athos walked in the direction indicated , and reached the suburb situated at the opposite extremity of the city from that by which he and his friends had entered it .
there he again appeared uneasy and embarrassed , and stopped for the third time .
fortunately , a mendicant passed , who , coming up to athos to ask charity , athos offered him half a crown to accompany him where he was going .
the mendicant hesitated at first , but at the sight of the piece of silver which shone in the darkness he consented , and walked on before athos .
arrived at the angle of a street , he pointed to a small house , isolated , solitary , and dismal . athos went toward the house , while the mendicant , who had received his reward , left as fast as his legs could carry him .
athos went round the house before he could distinguish the door , amid the red color in which the house was painted . no light appeared through the chinks of the shutters ; no noise gave reason to believe that it was inhabited . it was dark and silent as the tomb .
three times athos knocked without receiving an answer .
at the third knock , however , steps were heard inside . the door at length was opened , and a man appeared , of high stature , pale complexion , and black hair and beard .
athos and he exchanged some words in a low voice , then the tall man made a sign to the musketeer that he might come in .
athos immediately profited by the permission , and the door was closed behind him .
the man whom athos had come so far to seek , and whom he had found with so much trouble , introduced him into his laboratory , where he was engaged in fastening together with iron wire the dry bones of a skeleton .
all the frame was adjusted except the head , which lay on the table .
athos cast a cold and indifferent glance upon the objects we have described , and at the invitation of him whom he came to seek sat down near him .
then he explained to him the cause of his visit , and the service he required of him . but scarcely had he expressed his request when the unknown , who remained standing before the musketeer , drew back with signs of terror , and refused .
then athos took from his pocket a small paper , on which two lines were written , accompanied by a signature and a seal , and presented them to him who had made too prematurely these signs of repugnance .
the tall man had scarcely read these lines , seen the signature , and recognized the seal , when he bowed to denote that he had no longer any objection to make , and that he was ready to obey .
athos required no more . he arose , bowed , went out , returned by the same way he came , re - entered the hotel , and went to his apartment .
at daybreak dartagnan entered the chamber , and demanded what was to be done .
" to wait , " replied athos .
some minutes after , the superior of the convent sent to inform the musketeers that the burial would take place at midday .
as to the poisoner , they had heard no tidings of her whatever , only that she must have made her escape through the garden , on the sand of which her footsteps could be traced , and the door of which had been found shut .
as to the key , it had disappeared . at the hour appointed , lord de winter and the four friends repaired to the convent ; the bells tolled , the chapel was open , the grating of the choir was closed .
in the middle of the choir the body of the victim , clothed in her novitiate dress , was exposed .
on each side of the choir and behind the gratings opening into the convent was assembled the whole community of the carmelites , who listened to the divine service , and mingled their chant with the chant of the priests , without seeing the profane , or being seen by them .
at the door of the chapel dartagnan felt his courage fall anew , and returned to look for athos ; but athos had disappeared .
faithful to his mission of vengeance , athos had requested to be conducted to the garden ; and there upon the sand following the light steps of this woman , who left sharp tracks wherever she went , he advanced toward the gate which led into the wood , and causing it to be opened , he went out into the forest .
then all his suspicions were confirmed ; the road by which the carriage had disappeared encircled the forest .
athos followed the road for some time , his eyes fixed upon the ground ; slight stains of blood , which came from the wound inflicted upon the man who accompanied the carriage as a courier , or from one of the horses , dotted the road .
at the end of three - quarters of a league , within fifty paces of festubert , a larger bloodstain appeared ; the ground was trampled by horses .
between the forest and this accursed spot , a little behind the trampled ground , was the same track of small feet as in the garden ; the carriage had stopped here .
at this spot milady had come out of the wood , and entered the carriage .
satisfied with this discovery which confirmed all his suspicions , athos returned to the hotel , and found planchet impatiently waiting for him .
everything was as athos had foreseen .
the accident was set down to the account of robbers , who had stopped the chaise in the wood .
the man remained in the village ; the woman had had a relay of horses , and continued her journey .
planchet went in search of the postillion who had driven her , and found him .
he had taken the lady as far as fromelles ; and from fromelles she had set out for armentieres . planchet took the crossroad , and by seven oclock in the morning he was at armentieres .
there was but one tavern , the post .
planchet went and presented himself as a lackey out of a place , who was in search of a situation .
he had not chatted ten minutes with the people of the tavern before he learned that a woman had come there alone about eleven oclock the night before , had engaged a chamber , had sent for the master of the hotel , and told him she desired to remain some time in the neighborhood .
planchet had no need to learn more . he hastened to the rendezvous , found the lackeys at their posts , placed them as sentinels at all the outlets of the hotel , and came to find athos , who had just received this information when his friends returned .
all their countenances were melancholy and gloomy , even the mild countenance of aramis .
" what is to be done ? " asked dartagnan .
" to wait ! " replied athos .
each retired to his own apartment .
at eight oclock in the evening athos ordered the horses to be saddled , and lord de winter and his friends notified that they must prepare for the expedition .
in an instant all five were ready .
each examined his arms , and put them in order .
athos came down last , and found dartagnan already on horseback , and growing impatient .
" patience ! " cried athos ; " one of our party is still wanting . "
the four horsemen looked round them with astonishment , for they sought vainly in their minds to know who this other person could be .
at this moment planchet brought out athos s house ; the musketeer leaped lightly into the saddle .
in a quarter of an hour he returned , accompanied by a tall man , masked , and wrapped in a large red cloak .
at nine oclock , guided by planchet , the little cavalcade set out , taking the route the carriage had taken .
it was a melancholy sight -- that of these six men , traveling in silence , each plunged in his own thoughts , sad as despair , gloomy as chastisement .
65 trial
it was a stormy and dark night ; vast clouds covered the heavens , concealing the stars ; the moon would not rise till midnight .
occasionally , by the light of a flash of lightning which gleamed along the horizon , the road stretched itself before them , white and solitary ; the flash extinct , all remained in darkness .
every minute athos was forced to restrain dartagnan , constantly in advance of the little troop , and to beg him to keep in the line , which in an instant he again departed from . he had but one thought -- to go forward ; and he went .
they passed in silence through the little village of festubert , where the wounded servant was , and then skirted the wood of richebourg . at herlier , planchet , who led the column , turned to the left .
several times lord de winter , porthos , or aramis , tried to talk with the man in the red cloak ; but to every interrogation which they put to him he bowed , without response .
the travelers then comprehended that there must be some reason why the unknown preserved such a silence , and ceased to address themselves to him .
the storm increased , the flashes succeeded one another more rapidly , the thunder began to growl , and the wind , the precursor of a hurricane , whistled in the plumes and the hair of the horsemen .
the cavalcade trotted on more sharply .
a little before they came to fromelles the storm burst . they spread their cloaks . there remained three leagues to travel , and they did it amid torrents of rain .
dartagnan took off his hat , and could not be persuaded to make use of his cloak . he found pleasure in feeling the water trickle over his burning brow and over his body , agitated by feverish shudders .
the moment the little troop passed goskal and were approaching the port , a man sheltered beneath a tree detached himself from the trunk with which he had been confounded in the darkness , and advanced into the middle of the road , putting his finger on his lips .
athos recognized grimaud .
" what s the manner ? " cried athos . " has she left armentieres ? "
grimaud made a sign in the affirmative .
dartagnan ground his teeth .
" silence , dartagnan ! " said athos . " i have charged myself with this affair . it is for me , then , to interrogate grimaud . "
" where is she ? " asked athos .
grimaud extended his hands in the direction of the lys .
" alone ? " asked athos .
grimaud made the sign yes .
" gentlemen , " said athos , " she is alone within half a league of us , in the direction of the river . "
" that s well , " said dartagnan . " lead us , grimaud . "
grimaud took his course across the country , and acted as guide to the cavalcade .
at the end of five hundred paces , more or less , they came to a rivulet , which they forded .
by the aid of the lightning they perceived the village of erquinheim .
" is she there , grimaud ? " asked athos .
grimaud shook his head negatively .
" silence , then ! " cried athos .
and the troop continued their route .
another flash illuminated all around them . grimaud extended his arm , and by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished a little isolated house on the banks of the river , within a hundred paces of a ferry .
one window was lighted .
" here we are ! " said athos .
" she is there , " said he .
" and bazin ? " asked athos .
" while i watched the window , he guarded the door . "
" good ! " said athos . " you are good and faithful servants . "
athos sprang from his horse , gave the bridle to grimaud , and advanced toward the window , after having made a sign to the rest of the troop to go toward the door .
the little house was surrounded by a low , quickset hedge , two or three feet high . athos sprang over the hedge and went up to the window , which was without shutters , but had the half - curtains closely drawn .
he mounted the skirting stone that his eyes might look over the curtain .
by the light of a lamp he saw a woman , wrapped in a dark mantle , seated upon a stool near a dying fire . her elbows were placed upon a mean table , and she leaned her head upon her two hands , which were white as ivory .
he could not distinguish her countenance , but a sinister smile passed over the lips of athos . he was not deceived ; it was she whom he sought .
at this moment a horse neighed . milady raised her head , saw close to the panes the pale face of athos , and screamed .
athos , perceiving that she knew him , pushed the window with his knee and hand . the window yielded .
the squares were broken to shivers ; and athos , like the spectre of vengeance , leaped into the room .
milady rushed to the door and opened it . more pale and menacing than athos , dartagnan stood on the threshold .
milady recoiled , uttering a cry .
dartagnan , believing she might have means of flight and fearing she should escape , drew a pistol from his belt ; but athos raised his hand .
" put back that weapon , dartagnan ! " said he ; " this woman must be tried , not assassinated .
wait an instant , my friend , and you shall be satisfied .
come in , gentlemen . "
dartagnan obeyed ; for athos had the solemn voice and the powerful gesture of a judge sent by the lord himself .
behind dartagnan entered porthos , aramis , lord de winter , and the man in the red cloak .
the four lackeys guarded the door and the window .
milady had sunk into a chair , with her hands extended , as if to conjure this terrible apparition . perceiving her brother - in - law , she uttered a terrible cry .
" what do you want ? " screamed milady .
" we want , " said athos , " charlotte backson , who first was called comtesse de la fere , and afterwards milady de winter , baroness of sheffield . "
" that is i ! that is i ! " murmured milady , in extreme terror ; " what do you want ? "
m. dartagnan , it is for you to accuse her first . "
dartagnan advanced .
" before god and before men , " said he , " i accuse this woman of having poisoned constance bonacieux , who died yesterday evening . "
he turned towards porthos and aramis .
" we bear witness to this , " said the two musketeers , with one voice .
dartagnan continued : " before god and before men , i accuse this woman of having attempted to poison me , in wine which she sent me from villeroy , with a forged letter , as if that wine came from my friends . god preserved me , but a man named brisemont died in my place . "
" we bear witness to this , " said porthos and aramis , in the same manner as before .
" before god and before men , i accuse this woman of having urged me to the murder of the baron de wardes ; but as no one else can attest the truth of this accusation , i attest it myself .
i have done . "
and dartagnan passed to the other side of the room with porthos and aramis .
" your turn , my lord , " said athos .
the baron came forward .
" before god and before men , " said he , " i accuse this woman of having caused the assassination of the duke of buckingham . "
" the duke of buckingham assassinated ! " cried all present , with one voice .
" yes , " said the baron , " assassinated .
and at this moment , perhaps , felton is paying with his head for the crime of this fury ! "
my sister , how did your husband die ? "
" horror ! " cried porthos and aramis .
" assassin of buckingham , assassin of felton , assassin of my brother , i demand justice upon you , and i swear that if it be not granted to me , i will execute it myself . "
and lord de winter ranged himself by the side of dartagnan , leaving the place free for another accuser .
milady let her head sink between her two hands , and tried to recall her ideas , whirling in a mortal vertigo .
" my turn , " said athos , himself trembling as the lion trembles at the sight of the serpent--"my turn . i married that woman when she was a young girl ; i married her in opposition to the wishes of all my family ; i gave her my wealth , i gave her my name ; and one day i discovered that this woman was branded -- this woman was marked with a fleur - de - lis on her left shoulder . "
" oh , " said milady , raising herself , " i defy you to find any tribunal which pronounced that infamous sentence against me .
i defy you to find him who executed it . "
" silence ! " said a hollow voice .
" it is for me to reply to that ! "
and the man in the red cloak came forward in his turn .
" what man is that ? what man is that ? " cried milady , suffocated by terror , her hair loosening itself , and rising above her livid countenance as if alive .
all eyes were turned towards this man -- for to all except athos he was unknown .
even athos looked at him with as much stupefaction as the others , for he knew not how he could in any way find himself mixed up with the horrible drama then unfolded .
after approaching milady with a slow and solemn step , so that the table alone separated them , the unknown took off his mask .
help , help ! " screamed she , turning towards the wall , as if she would tear an opening with her hands .
" the executioner of lille , the executioner of lille ! " cried milady , a prey to insensate terror , and clinging with her hands to the wall to avoid falling .
every one drew back , and the man in the red cloak remained standing alone in the middle of the room .
" oh , grace , grace , pardon ! " cried the wretch , falling on her knees .
the unknown waited for silence , and then resumed , " i told you well that she would know me .
yes , i am the executioner of lille , and this is my history . "
all eyes were fixed upon this man , whose words were listened to with anxious attention .
" that woman was once a young girl , as beautiful as she is today .
she was a nun in the convent of the benedictines of templemar .
a young priest , with a simple and trustful heart , performed the duties of the church of that convent . she undertook his seduction , and succeeded ; she would have seduced a saint .
" their vows were sacred and irrevocable . their connection could not last long without ruining both .
neither had any . the priest stole the sacred vases , and sold them ; but as they were preparing to escape together , they were both arrested .
" eight days later she had seduced the son of the jailer , and escaped .
the young priest was condemned to ten years of imprisonment , and to be branded .
i was executioner of the city of lille , as this woman has said .
i was obliged to brand the guilty one ; and he , gentlemen , was my brother !
" i then swore that this woman who had ruined him , who was more than his accomplice , since she had urged him to the crime , should at least share his punishment .
i suspected where she was concealed . i followed her , i caught her , i bound her ; and i imprinted the same disgraceful mark upon her that i had imprinted upon my poor brother .
" the day after my return to lille , my brother in his turn succeeded in making his escape ; i was accused of complicity , and was condemned to remain in his place till he should be again a prisoner .
my poor brother was ignorant of this sentence . he rejoined this woman ; they fled together into berry , and there he obtained a little curacy .
this woman passed for his sister .
" the lord of the estate on which the chapel of the curacy was situated saw this pretend sister , and became enamoured of her -- amorous to such a degree that he proposed to marry her .
then she quitted him she had ruined for him she was destined to ruin , and became the comtesse de la fere-- "
all eyes were turned towards athos , whose real name that was , and who made a sign with his head that all was true which the executioner had said .
" then , " resumed he , " mad , desperate , determined to get rid of an existence from which she had stolen everything , honor and happiness , my poor brother returned to lille , and learning the sentence which had condemned me in his place , surrendered himself , and hanged himself that same night from the iron bar of the loophole of his prison .
" to do justice to them who had condemned me , they kept their word .
as soon as the identity of my brother was proved , i was set at liberty .
" that is the crime of which i accuse her ; that is the cause for which she was branded . "
" monsieur dartagnan , " said athos , " what is the penalty you demand against this woman ? "
" the punishment of death , " replied dartagnan .
" my lord de winter , " continued athos , " what is the penalty you demand against this woman ? "
" the punishment of death , " replied lord de winter .
" messieurs porthos and aramis , " repeated athos , " you who are her judges , what is the sentence you pronounce upon this woman ? "
" the punishment of death , " replied the musketeers , in a hollow voice .
milady uttered a frightful shriek , and dragged herself along several paces upon her knees toward her judges .
athos stretched out his hand toward her .
" charlotte backson , comtesse de la fere , milady de winter , " said he , " your crimes have wearied men on earth and god in heaven .
if you know a prayer , say it -- for you are condemned , and you shall die . "
at these words , which left no hope , milady raised herself in all her pride , and wished to speak ; but her strength failed her . she felt that a powerful and implacable hand seized her by the hair , and dragged her away as irrevocably as fatality drags humanity . she did not , therefore , even attempt the least resistance , and went out of the cottage .
lord de winter , dartagnan , athos , porthos , and aramis , went out close behind her . the lackeys followed their masters , and the chamber was left solitary , with its broken window , its open door , and its smoky lamp burning sadly on the table .
66 execution
it was near midnight ; the moon , lessened by its decline , and reddened by the last traces of the storm , arose behind the little town of armentieres , which showed against its pale light the dark outline of its houses , and the skeleton of its high belfry .
in front of them the lys rolled its waters like a river of molten tin ; while on the other side was a black mass of trees , profiled on a stormy sky , invaded by large coppery clouds which created a sort of twilight amid the night .
on the left was an old abandoned mill , with its motionless wings , from the ruins of which an owl threw out its shrill , periodical , and monotonous cry .
on the right and on the left of the road , which the dismal procession pursued , appeared a few low , stunted trees , which looked like deformed dwarfs crouching down to watch men traveling at this sinister hour .
from time to time a broad sheet of lightning opened the horizon in its whole width , darted like a serpent over the black mass of trees , and like a terrible scimitar divided the heavens and the waters into two parts .
not a breath of wind now disturbed the heavy atmosphere . a deathlike silence oppressed all nature . the soil was humid and glittering with the rain which had recently fallen , and the refreshed herbs sent forth their perfume with additional energy .
two lackeys dragged milady , whom each held by one arm . the executioner walked behind them , and lord de winter , dartagnan , porthos , and aramis walked behind the executioner .
planchet and bazin came last .
the two lackeys conducted milady to the bank of the river . her mouth was mute ; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence , supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked .
being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys , " a thousand pistoles to each of you , if you will assist my escape ; but if you deliver me up to your masters , i have near at hand avengers who will make you pay dearly for my death . "
grimaud hesitated .
mousqueton trembled in all his members .
athos , who heard milady s voice , came sharply up . lord de winter did the same .
" change these lackeys , " said he ; " she has spoken to them . they are no longer sure . "
planchet and bazin were called , and took the places of grimaud and mousqueton .
on the bank of the river the executioner approached milady , and bound her hands and feet .
then she broke the silence to cry out ,
" you are not a woman , " said athos , coldly and sternly . " you do not belong to the human species ; you are a demon escaped from hell , whither we send you back again . "
" ah , you virtuous men ! " said milady ; " please to remember that he who shall touch a hair of my head is himself an assassin . "
" the executioner may kill , without being on that account an assassin , " said the man in the red cloak , rapping upon his immense sword . " this is the last judge ; that is all . nachrichter , as say our neighbors , the germans . "
and as he bound her while saying these words , milady uttered two or three savage cries , which produced a strange and melancholy effect in flying away into the night , and losing themselves in the depths of the woods .
" if i am guilty , if i have committed the crimes you accuse me of , " shrieked milady , " take me before a tribunal . you are not judges !
you can not condemn me ! " " i offered you tyburn , " said lord de winter . " why did you not accept it ? "
" because i am not willing to die ! " cried milady , struggling . " because i am too young to die ! "
" the woman you poisoned at bethune was still younger than you , madame , and yet she is dead , " said dartagnan .
" i will enter a cloister ; i will become a nun , " said milady .
" you were in a cloister , " said the executioner , " and you left it to ruin my brother . "
milady uttered a cry of terror and sank upon her knees .
the executioner took her up in his arms and was carrying her toward the boat .
" oh , my god ! " cried she , " my god ! are you going to drown me ? "
these cries had something so heartrending in them that m. dartagnan , who had been at first the most eager in pursuit of milady , sat down on the stump of a tree and hung his head , covering his ears with the palms of his hands ; and yet , notwithstanding , he could still hear her cry and threaten .
dartagnan was the youngest of all these men . his heart failed him .
" oh , i can not behold this frightful spectacle ! " said he . " i can not consent that this woman should die thus ! "
milady heard these few words and caught at a shadow of hope .
" dartagnan , dartagnan ! " cried she ; " remember that i loved you ! "
the young man rose and took a step toward her .
but athos rose likewise , drew his sword , and placed himself in the way .
" if you take one step farther , dartagnan , " said he , " we shall cross swords together . "
dartagnan sank on his knees and prayed .
" come , " continued athos , " executioner , do your duty . "
" willingly , monseigneur , " said the executioner ; " for as i am a good catholic , i firmly believe i am acting justly in performing my functions on this woman . "
" that s well . "
athos made a step toward milady .
" i pardon you , " said he , " the ill you have done me . i pardon you for my blasted future , my lost honor , my defiled love , and my salvation forever compromised by the despair into which you have cast me .
die in peace ! "
lord de winter advanced in his turn .
die in peace ! "
" and i , " said m. dartagnan . " pardon me , madame , for having by a trick unworthy of a gentleman provoked your anger ; and i , in exchange , pardon you the murder of my poor love and your cruel vengeance against me . i pardon you , and i weep for you .
die in peace ! "
" i am lost ! " murmured milady in english . " i must die ! "
she saw nothing ; she listened , and she heard nothing .
" where am i to die ? " said she .
" on the other bank , " replied the executioner .
then he placed her in the boat , and as he was going to set foot in it himself , athos handed him a sum of silver .
" here , " said he , " is the price of the execution , that it may be plain we act as judges . "
" that is correct , " said the executioner ; " and now in her turn , let this woman see that i am not fulfilling my trade , but my debt . "
and he threw the money into the river .
the boat moved off toward the left - hand shore of the lys , bearing the guilty woman and the executioner ; all the others remained on the right - hand bank , where they fell on their knees .
the troop of friends saw it gain the opposite bank ; the figures were defined like black shadows on the red - tinted horizon .
milady , during the passage had contrived to untie the cord which fastened her feet . on coming near the bank , she jumped lightly on shore and took to flight .
but the soil was moist ; on reaching the top of the bank , she slipped and fell upon her knees .
she was struck , no doubt , with a superstitious idea ; she conceived that heaven denied its aid , and she remained in the attitude in which she had fallen , her head drooping and her hands clasped .
three days afterward the four musketeers were in paris ; they had not exceeded their leave of absence , and that same evening they went to pay their customary visit to m. de treville .
" well , gentlemen , " said the brave captain , " i hope you have been well amused during your excursion . "
" prodigiously , " replied athos in the name of himself and his comrades .
67 conclusion
on the sixth of the following month the king , in compliance with the promise he had made the cardinal to return to la rochelle , left his capital still in amazement at the news which began to spread itself of buckingham s assassination .
although warned that the man she had loved so much was in great danger , the queen , when his death was announced to her , would not believe the fact , and even imprudently exclaimed , " it is false ; he has just written to me ! "
but the next day she was obliged to believe this fatal intelligence ; laporte , detained in england , as everyone else had been , by the orders of charles i , arrived , and was the bearer of the duke s dying gift to the queen .
the joy of the king was lively . he did not even give himself the trouble to dissemble , and displayed it with affectation before the queen .
louis xiii , like every weak mind , was wanting in generosity .
but the king soon again became dull and indisposed ; his brow was not one of those that long remain clear . he felt that in returning to camp he should re - enter slavery ; nevertheless , he did return .
the return to la rochelle , therefore , was profoundly dull .
our four friends , in particular , astonished their comrades ; they traveled together , side by side , with sad eyes and heads lowered .
athos alone from time to time raised his expansive brow ; a flash kindled in his eyes , and a bitter smile passed over his lips , then , like his comrades , he sank again into reverie .
as soon as the escort arrived in a city , when they had conducted the king to his quarters the four friends either retired to their own or to some secluded cabaret , where they neither drank nor played ; they only conversed in a low voice , looking around attentively to see that no one overheard them .
" holloa , monsieur dartagnan ! " said he , " is not that you whom i see yonder ? "
dartagnan raised his head and uttered a cry of joy .
it was the man he called his phantom ; it was his stranger of meung , of the rue des fossoyeurs and of arras .
" who are you , then ? " demanded dartagnan , lowering the point of his sword , but without yet surrendering it .
" i am the chevalier de rochefort , " answered the other , " the equerry of monsieur le cardinal richelieu , and i have orders to conduct you to his eminence . "
" we are returning to his eminence , monsieur the chevalier , " said athos , advancing ; " and you will please to accept the word of monsieur dartagnan that he will go straight to la rochelle . "
" i must place him in the hands of guards who will take him into camp . "
" we will be his guards , monsieur , upon our word as gentlemen ; but likewise , upon our word as gentlemen , " added athos , knitting his brow , " monsieur dartagnan shall not leave us . "
the chevalier de rochefort cast a glance backward , and saw that porthos and aramis had placed themselves between him and the gate ; he understood that he was completely at the mercy of these four men .
" gentlemen , " said he , " if monsieur dartagnan will surrender his sword to me and join his word to yours , i shall be satisfied with your promise to convey monsieur dartagnan to the quarters of monseigneur the cardinal . "
" you have my word , monsieur , and here is my sword . "
" this suits me the better , " said rochefort , " as i wish to continue my journey . "
" if it is for the purpose of rejoining milady , " said athos , coolly , " it is useless ; you will not find her . "
" what has become of her , then ? " asked rochefort , eagerly .
" return to camp and you shall know . "
rochefort remained for a moment in thought ; then , as they were only a day s journey from surgeres , whither the cardinal was to come to meet the king , he resolved to follow the advice of athos and go with them .
besides , this return offered him the advantage of watching his prisoner .
they resumed their route .
on the morrow , at three oclock in the afternoon , they arrived at surgeres .
the cardinal there awaited louis xiii .
the minister and the king exchanged numerous caresses , felicitating each other upon the fortunate chance which had freed france from the inveterate enemy who set all europe against her . after which , the cardinal , who had been informed that dartagnan was arrested and who was anxious to see him , took leave of the king , inviting him to come the next day to view the work already done upon the dyke .
on returning in the evening to his quarters at the bridge of la pierre , the cardinal found , standing before the house he occupied , dartagnan , without his sword , and the three musketeers armed .
this time , as he was well attended , he looked at them sternly , and made a sign with his eye and hand for dartagnan to follow him .
dartagnan obeyed .
" we shall wait for you , dartagnan , " said athos , loud enough for the cardinal to hear him .
his eminence bent his brow , stopped for an instant , and then kept on his way without uttering a single word .
dartagnan entered after the cardinal , and behind dartagnan the door was guarded .
his eminence entered the chamber which served him as a study , and made a sign to rochefort to bring in the young musketeer .
rochefort obeyed and retired .
dartagnan remained alone in front of the cardinal ; this was his second interview with richelieu , and he afterward confessed that he felt well assured it would be his last .
richelieu remained standing , leaning against the mantelpiece ; a table was between him and dartagnan .
" monsieur , " said the cardinal , " you have been arrested by my orders . "
" so they tell me , monseigneur . "
" do you know why ? "
" no , monseigneur , for the only thing for which i could be arrested is still unknown to your eminence . "
richelieu looked steadfastly at the young man .
" holloa ! " said he , " what does that mean ? "
" crimes are imputed to you which had brought down far loftier heads than yours , monsieur , " said the cardinal .
" what , monseigneur ? " said dartagnan , with a calmness which astonished the cardinal himself .
" you are charged with having corresponded with the enemies of the kingdom ; you are charged with having surprised state secrets ; you are charged with having tried to thwart the plans of your general . "
" and who charges me with this , monseigneur ? " said dartagnan , who had no doubt the accusation came from milady , " a woman branded by the justice of the country ; a woman who has espoused one man in france and another in england ; a woman who poisoned her second husband and who attempted both to poison and assassinate me ! "
" what do you say , monsieur ? " cried the cardinal , astonished ; " and of what woman are you speaking thus ? "
" of milady de winter , " replied dartagnan , " yes , of milady de winter , of whose crimes your eminence is doubtless ignorant , since you have honored her with your confidence . "
" monsieur , " said the cardinal , " if milady de winter has committed the crimes you lay to her charge , she shall be punished . "
" she has been punished , monseigneur . "
" and who has punished her ? "
" we . "
" she is in prison ? "
" she is dead . "
dartagnan then related the poisoning of mme . bonacieux in the convent of the carmelites at bethune , the trial in the isolated house , and the execution on the banks of the lys .
a shudder crept through the body of the cardinal , who did not shudder readily .
but all at once , as if undergoing the influence of an unspoken thought , the countenance of the cardinal , till then gloomy , cleared up by degrees , and recovered perfect serenity .
" so , " said the cardinal , in a tone that contrasted strongly with the severity of his words , " you have constituted yourselves judges , without remembering that they who punish without license to punish are assassins ? "
" monseigneur , i swear to you that i never for an instant had the intention of defending my head against you .
i willingly submit to any punishment your eminence may please to inflict upon me .
i do not hold life dear enough to be afraid of death . "
" yes , i know you are a man of a stout heart , monsieur , " said the cardinal , with a voice almost affectionate ; " i can therefore tell you beforehand you shall be tried , and even condemned . "
" another might reply to your eminence that he had his pardon in his pocket . i content myself with saying : command , monseigneur ; i am ready . "
" your pardon ? " said richelieu , surprised .
" yes , monseigneur , " said dartagnan .
" and signed by whom -- by the king ? "
and the cardinal pronounced these words with a singular expression of contempt .
" no , by your eminence . "
" by me ? you are insane , monsieur . "
" monseigneur will doubtless recognize his own handwriting . "
and dartagnan presented to the cardinal the precious piece of paper which athos had forced from milady , and which he had given to dartagnan to serve him as a safeguard .
his eminence took the paper , and read in a slow voice , dwelling upon every syllable :
" dec . 3 , 1627 " it is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this has done what he has done .
" richelieu " the cardinal , after having read these two lines , sank into a profound reverie ; but he did not return the paper to dartagnan .
" he is meditating by what sort of punishment he shall cause me to die , " said the gascon to himself . " well , my faith ! he shall see how a gentleman can die . "
the young musketeer was in excellent disposition to die heroically .
richelieu still continued thinking , rolling and unrolling the paper in his hands .
on the other side , the crimes , the power , and the infernal genius of milady had more than once terrified him .
he felt something like a secret joy at being forever relieved of this dangerous accomplice .
richelieu slowly tore the paper which dartagnan had generously relinquished .
" i am lost ! " said dartagnan to himself .
and he bowed profoundly before the cardinal , like a man who says , " lord , thy will be done ! "
the cardinal approached the table , and without sitting down , wrote a few lines upon a parchment of which two - thirds were already filled , and affixed his seal .
" that is my condemnation , " thought dartagnan ; " he will spare me the ennui of the bastille , or the tediousness of a trial .
that s very kind of him . "
" i have taken from you one carte blanche to give you another .
the name is wanting in this commission ; you can write it yourself . "
dartagnan fell at the feet of the cardinal .
" monseigneur , " said he , " my life is yours ; henceforth dispose of it . but this favor which you bestow upon me i do not merit . i have three friends who are more meritorious and more worthy-- "
" you are a brave youth , dartagnan , " interrupted the cardinal , tapping him familiarly on the shoulder , charmed at having vanquished this rebellious nature . " do with this commission what you will ; only remember , though the name be blank , it is to you i give it . "
" i shall never forget it , " replied dartagnan . " your eminence may be certain of that . "
the cardinal turned and said in a loud voice , " rochefort ! "
the chevalier , who no doubt was near the door , entered immediately .
" rochefort , " said the cardinal , " you see monsieur dartagnan . i receive him among the number of my friends . greet each other , then ; and be wise if you wish to preserve your heads . "
rochefort and dartagnan coolly greeted each other with their lips ; but the cardinal was there , observing them with his vigilant eye .
they left the chamber at the same time .
" we shall meet again , shall we not , monsieur ? "
" when you please , " said dartagnan .
" an opportunity will come , " replied rochefort .
" hey ? " said the cardinal , opening the door .
the two men smiled at each other , shook hands , and saluted his eminence .
" we were beginning to grow impatient , " said athos .
" here i am , my friends , " replied dartagnan ; " not only free , but in favor . "
" tell us about it . "
" this evening ; but for the moment , let us separate . "
accordingly , that same evening dartagnan repaired to the quarters of athos , whom he found in a fair way to empty a bottle of spanish wine -- an occupation which he religiously accomplished every night .
dartagnan related what had taken place between the cardinal and himself , and drawing the commission from his pocket , said , " here , my dear athos , this naturally belongs to you . "
athos smiled with one of his sweet and expressive smiles .
" friend , " said he , " for athos this is too much ; for the comte de la fere it is too little .
keep the commission ; it is yours . alas ! you have purchased it dearly enough . "
dartagnan left athos s chamber and went to that of porthos .
he found him clothed in a magnificent dress covered with splendid embroidery , admiring himself before a glass .
" ah , ah ! is that you , dear friend ? " exclaimed porthos . " how do you think these garments fit me ? "
" wonderfully , " said dartagnan ; " but i come to offer you a dress which will become you still better . "
" what ? " asked porthos .
" that of a lieutenant of musketeers . "
dartagnan related to porthos the substance of his interview with the cardinal , and said , taking the commission from his pocket , " here , my friend , write your name upon it and become my chief . "
porthos cast his eyes over the commission and returned it to dartagnan , to the great astonishment of the young man .
" yes , " said he , " yes , that would flatter me very much ; but i should not have time enough to enjoy the distinction .
during our expedition to bethune the husband of my duchess died ; so , my dear , the coffer of the defunct holding out its arms to me , i shall marry the widow .
look here ! i was trying on my wedding suit .
keep the lieutenancy , my dear , keep it . "
the young man then entered the apartment of aramis .
he found him kneeling before a priedieu with his head leaning on an open prayer book .
he described to him his interview with the cardinal , and said , for the third time drawing his commission from his pocket , " you , our friend , our intelligence , our invisible protector , accept this commission . you have merited it more than any of us by your wisdom and your counsels , always followed by such happy results . "
this time my determination is irrevocably taken . after the siege i shall enter the house of the lazarists .
keep the commission , dartagnan ; the profession of arms suits you . you will be a brave and adventurous captain . "
dartagnan , his eye moist with gratitude though beaming with joy , went back to athos , whom he found still at table contemplating the charms of his last glass of malaga by the light of his lamp .
" well , " said he , " they likewise have refused me . "
" that , dear friend , is because nobody is more worthy than yourself . "
he took a quill , wrote the name of dartagnan in the commission , and returned it to him .
" i shall then have no more friends , " said the young man . " alas ! nothing but bitter recollections . "
and he let his head sink upon his hands , while two large tears rolled down his cheeks .
" you are young , " replied athos ; " and your bitter recollections have time to change themselves into sweet remembrances . "
epilogue
la rochelle , deprived of the assistance of the english fleet and of the diversion promised by buckingham , surrendered after a siege of a year . on the twenty - eighth of october , 1628 , the capitulation was signed .
the king made his entrance into paris on the twenty - third of december of the same year .
he was received in triumph , as if he came from conquering an enemy and not frenchmen .
he entered by the faubourg st . jacques , under verdant arches .
dartagnan took possession of his command .
porthos left the service , and in the course of the following year married mme . coquenard ; the coffer so much coveted contained eight hundred thousand livres .
mousqueton had a magnificent livery , and enjoyed the satisfaction of which he had been ambitious all his life -- that of standing behind a gilded carriage .
bazin became a lay brother .
athos remained a musketeer under the command of dartagnan till the year 1633 , at which period , after a journey he made to touraine , he also quit the service , under the pretext of having inherited a small property in roussillon .
grimaud followed athos .
dartagnan fought three times with rochefort , and wounded him three times .
" i shall probably kill you the fourth , " said he to him , holding out his hand to assist him to rise .
" it is much better both for you and for me to stop where we are , " answered the wounded man . " corbleu -- i am more your friend than you think -- for after our very first encounter , i could by saying a word to the cardinal have had your throat cut ! "
they this time embraced heartily , and without retaining any malice .
planchet obtained from rochefort the rank of sergeant in the piedmont regiment .
m bonacieux lived on very quietly , wholly ignorant of what had become of his wife , and caring very little about it .
in fact , m. bonacieux , having left his house at seven oclock in the evening to go to the louvre , never appeared again in the rue des fossoyeurs ; the opinion of those who seemed to be best informed was that he was fed and lodged in some royal castle , at the expense of his generous eminence .
source : project gutenberg
jane eyre
charlotte bronte
chapter i
there was no possibility of taking a walk that day .
we had been wandering , indeed , in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning ; but since dinner ( mrs . reed , when there was no company , dined early ) the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre , and a rain so penetrating , that further out - door exercise was now out of the question .
i was glad of it : i never liked long walks , especially on chilly afternoons : dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight , with nipped fingers and toes , and a heart saddened by the chidings of bessie , the nurse , and humbled by the consciousness of my physical inferiority to eliza , john , and georgiana reed .
the said eliza , john , and georgiana were now clustered round their mama in the drawing - room : she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside , and with her darlings about her ( for the time neither quarrelling nor crying ) looked perfectly happy .
me , she had dispensed from joining the group ; saying , " she regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a distance ; but that until she heard from bessie , and could discover by her own observation , that i was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition , a more attractive and sprightly manner -- something lighter , franker , more natural , as it were -- she really must exclude me from privileges intended only for contented , happy , little children . "
" what does bessie say i have done ? " i asked .
" jane , i do n't like cavillers or questioners ; besides , there is something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in that manner .
be seated somewhere ; and until you can speak pleasantly , remain silent . "
i mounted into the window- seat : gathering up my feet , i sat cross - legged , like a turk ; and , having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close , i was shrined in double retirement .
folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand ; to the left were the clear panes of glass , protecting , but not separating me from the drear november day .
they were those which treat of the haunts of sea - fowl ; of " the solitary rocks and promontories " by them only inhabited ; of the coast of norway , studded with isles from its southern extremity , the lindeness , or naze , to the north cape-- " where the northern ocean , in vast whirls , boils round the naked , melancholy isles of farthest thule ; and the atlantic surge pours in among the stormy hebrides . "
the words in these introductory pages connected themselves with the succeeding vignettes , and gave significance to the rock standing up alone in a sea of billow and spray ; to the broken boat stranded on a desolate coast ; to the cold and ghastly moon glancing through bars of cloud at a wreck just sinking .
with bewick on my knee , i was then happy : happy at least in my way . i feared nothing but interruption , and that came too soon .
the breakfast- room door opened .
" boh ! madam mope ! " cried the voice of john reed ; then he paused : he found the room apparently empty . " where the dickens is she ! " he continued . " lizzy ! georgy ! ( calling to his sisters ) joan is not here : tell mama she is run out into the rain -- bad animal ! "
" it is well i drew the curtain , " thought i ; and i wished fervently he might not discover my hiding - place : nor would john reed have found it out himself ; he was not quick either of vision or conception ; but eliza just put her head in at the door , and said at once--
" she is in the window - seat , to be sure , jack . "
and i came out immediately , for i trembled at the idea of being dragged forth by the said jack .
" what do you want ? " i asked , with awkward diffidence .
" say , ' what do you want , master reed ? ' " was the answer .
john reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old ; four years older than i , for i was but ten : large and stout for his age , with a dingy and unwholesome skin ; thick lineaments in a spacious visage , heavy limbs and large extremities .
he gorged himself habitually at table , which made him bilious , and gave him a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheeks .
he ought now to have been at school ; but his mama had taken him home for a month or two , " on account of his delicate health . "
john had not much affection for his mother and sisters , and an antipathy to me .
accustomed to john reed 's abuse , i never had an idea of replying to it ; my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the insult .
" what were you doing behind the curtain ? " he asked .
" i was reading . "
" show the book . "
i returned to the window and fetched it thence .
now , i 'll teach you to rummage my bookshelves : for they _ are _ mine ; all the house belongs to me , or will do in a few years . go and stand by the door , out of the way of the mirror and the windows . "
the cut bled , the pain was sharp : my terror had passed its climax ; other feelings succeeded .
" what ! what ! " he cried . " did she say that to me ? did you hear her , eliza and georgiana ?
wo n't i tell mama ? but first-- " he ran headlong at me : i felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder : he had closed with a desperate thing .
aid was near him : eliza and georgiana had run for mrs . reed , who was gone upstairs : she now came upon the scene , followed by bessie and her maid abbot .
" did ever anybody see such a picture of passion ! "
then mrs . reed subjoined--
" take her away to the red - room , and lock her in there . "
four hands were immediately laid upon me , and i was borne upstairs .
chapter ii
i resisted all the way : a new thing for me , and a circumstance which greatly strengthened the bad opinion bessie and miss abbot were disposed to entertain of me .
" hold her arms , miss abbot : she 's like a mad cat . "
" master !
how is he my master ? am i a servant ? "
" no ; you are less than a servant , for you do nothing for your keep .
there , sit down , and think over your wickedness . "
" if you do n't sit still , you must be tied down , " said bessie .
" miss abbot , lend me your garters ; she would break mine directly . "
miss abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessary ligature .
this preparation for bonds , and the additional ignominy it inferred , took a little of the excitement out of me .
" do n't take them off , " i cried ; " i will not stir . "
in guarantee whereof , i attached myself to my seat by my hands .
" mind you do n't , " said bessie ; and when she had ascertained that i was really subsiding , she loosened her hold of me ; then she and miss abbot stood with folded arms , looking darkly and doubtfully on my face , as incredulous of my sanity .
" she never did so before , " at last said bessie , turning to the abigail .
" but it was always in her , " was the reply . " i 've told missis often my opinion about the child , and missis agreed with me . she 's an underhand little thing : i never saw a girl of her age with so much cover . "
bessie answered not ; but ere long , addressing me , she said--"you ought to be aware , miss , that you are under obligations to mrs . reed : she keeps you : if she were to turn you off , you would have to go to the poorhouse . "
i had nothing to say to these words : they were not new to me : my very first recollections of existence included hints of the same kind .
this reproach of my dependence had become a vague sing - song in my ear : very painful and crushing , but only half intelligible .
miss abbot joined in-- " and you ought not to think yourself on an equality with the misses reed and master reed , because missis kindly allows you to be brought up with them .
say your prayers , miss eyre , when you are by yourself ; for if you do n't repent , something bad might be permitted to come down the chimney and fetch you away . "
they went , shutting the door , and locking it behind them .
this room was chill , because it seldom had a fire ; it was silent , because remote from the nursery and kitchen ; solemn , because it was known to be so seldom entered .
i was not quite sure whether they had locked the door ; and when i dared move , i got up and went to see .
alas ! yes : no jail was ever more secure .
returning , i had to cross before the looking- glass ; my fascinated glance involuntarily explored the depth it revealed .
why was i always suffering , always browbeaten , always accused , for ever condemned ?
why could i never please ? why was it useless to try to win any one 's favour ?
i dared commit no fault : i strove to fulfil every duty ; and i was termed naughty and tiresome , sullen and sneaking , from morning to noon , and from noon to night .
what a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon ! how all my brain was in tumult , and all my heart in insurrection !
i was a discord in gateshead hall : i was like nobody there ; i had nothing in harmony with mrs . reed or her children , or her chosen vassalage .
if they did not love me , in fact , as little did i love them .
daylight began to forsake the red - room ; it was past four o'clock , and the beclouded afternoon was tending to drear twilight . i heard the rain still beating continuously on the staircase window , and the wind howling in the grove behind the hall ; i grew by degrees cold as a stone , and then my courage sank .
shaking my hair from my eyes , i lifted my head and tried to look boldly round the dark room ; at this moment a light gleamed on the wall .
was it , i asked myself , a ray from the moon penetrating some aperture in the blind ?
i can now conjecture readily that this streak of light was , in all likelihood , a gleam from a lantern carried by some one across the lawn : but then , prepared as my mind was for horror , shaken as my nerves were by agitation , i thought the swift darting beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world . my heart beat thick , my head grew hot ; a sound filled my ears , which i deemed the rushing of wings ; something seemed near me ; i was oppressed , suffocated : endurance broke down ; i rushed to the door and shook the lock in desperate effort .
steps came running along the outer passage ; the key turned , bessie and abbot entered .
" miss eyre , are you ill ? " said bessie .
" what a dreadful noise ! it went quite through me ! " exclaimed abbot .
" take me out ! let me go into the nursery ! " was my cry .
" what for ? are you hurt ? have you seen something ? " again demanded bessie .
" abbot and bessie , i believe i gave orders that jane eyre should be left in the red - room till i came to her myself . "
" miss jane screamed so loud , ma'am , " pleaded bessie .
" let her go , " was the only answer .
" loose bessie 's hand , child : you can not succeed in getting out by these means , be assured .
forgive me ! i can not endure it -- let me be punished some other way ! i shall be killed if-- "
" silence ! this violence is all most repulsive : " and so , no doubt , she felt it .
bessie and abbot having retreated , mrs . reed , impatient of my now frantic anguish and wild sobs , abruptly thrust me back and locked me in , without farther parley .
i heard her sweeping away ; and soon after she was gone , i suppose i had a species of fit : unconsciousness closed the scene .
chapter iii
the next thing i remember is , waking up with a feeling as if i had had a frightful nightmare , and seeing before me a terrible red glare , crossed with thick black bars .
i heard voices , too , speaking with a hollow sound , and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water : agitation , uncertainty , and an all - predominating sense of terror confused my faculties .
ere long , i became aware that some one was handling me ; lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting posture , and that more tenderly than i had ever been raised or upheld before . i rested my head against a pillow or an arm , and felt easy .
it was night : a candle burnt on the table ; bessie stood at the bed- foot with a basin in her hand , and a gentleman sat in a chair near my pillow , leaning over me .
turning from bessie ( though her presence was far less obnoxious to me than that of abbot , for instance , would have been ) , i scrutinised the face of the gentleman : i knew him ; it was mr . lloyd , an apothecary , sometimes called in by mrs . reed when the servants were ailing : for herself and the children she employed a physician .
" well , who am i ? " he asked .
i pronounced his name , offering him at the same time my hand : he took it , smiling and saying , " we shall do very well by - and - by . "
then he laid me down , and addressing bessie , charged her to be very careful that i was not disturbed during the night .
having given some further directions , and intimates that he should call again the next day , he departed ; to my grief : i felt so sheltered and befriended while he sat in the chair near my pillow ; and as he closed the door after him , all the room darkened and my heart again sank : inexpressible sadness weighed it down .
" do you feel as if you should sleep , miss ? " asked bessie , rather softly .
scarcely dared i answer her ; for i feared the next sentence might be rough . " i will try . "
" would you like to drink , or could you eat anything ? "
" no , thank you , bessie . "
wonderful civility this ! it emboldened me to ask a question .
" bessie , what is the matter with me ? am i ill ? "
" you fell sick , i suppose , in the red - room with crying ; you 'll be better soon , no doubt . "
bessie went into the housemaid 's apartment , which was near . i heard her say--
" sarah , come and sleep with me in the nursery ; i dare n't for my life be alone with that poor child to - night : she might die ; it 's such a strange thing she should have that fit : i wonder if she saw anything . missis was rather too hard . "
sarah came back with her ; they both went to bed ; they were whispering together for half - an - hour before they fell asleep .
i caught scraps of their conversation , from which i was able only too distinctly to infer the main subject discussed .
" something passed her , all dressed in white , and vanished"--"a great black dog behind him"--"three loud raps on the chamber door"--"a light in the churchyard just over his grave , " & c. & c.
at last both slept : the fire and the candle went out .
no severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of the red- room ; it only gave my nerves a shock of which i feel the reverberation to this day .
yes , mrs . reed , to you i owe some fearful pangs of mental suffering , but i ought to forgive you , for you knew not what you did : while rending my heart - strings , you thought you were only uprooting my bad propensities .
next day , by noon , i was up and dressed , and sat wrapped in a shawl by the nursery hearth .
i could not eat the tart ; and the plumage of the bird , the tints of the flowers , seemed strangely faded : i put both plate and tart away .
bessie asked if i would have a book : the word _ book _ acted as a transient stimulus , and i begged her to fetch gulliver 's travels from the library .
yet , when this cherished volume was now placed in my hand -- when i turned over its leaves , and sought in its marvellous pictures the charm i had , till now , never failed to find -- all was eerie and dreary ; the giants were gaunt goblins , the pigmies malevolent and fearful imps , gulliver a most desolate wanderer in most dread and dangerous regions .
i closed the book , which i dared no longer peruse , and put it on the table , beside the untasted tart .
bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room , and having washed her hands , she opened a certain little drawer , full of splendid shreds of silk and satin , and began making a new bonnet for georgiana 's doll .
meantime she sang : her song was--
" in the days when we went gipsying , a long time ago . "
i had often heard the song before , and always with lively delight ; for bessie had a sweet voice,--at least , i thought so . but now , though her voice was still sweet , i found in its melody an indescribable sadness .
sometimes , preoccupied with her work , she sang the refrain very low , very lingeringly ; " a long time ago " came out like the saddest cadence of a funeral hymn .
she passed into another ballad , this time a really doleful one .
" my feet they are sore , and my limbs they are weary ; long is the way , and the mountains are wild ; soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary over the path of the poor orphan child .
why did they send me so far and so lonely , up where the moors spread and grey rocks are piled ?
men are hard - hearted , and kind angels only watch o'er the steps of a poor orphan child .
there is a thought that for strength should avail me , though both of shelter and kindred despoiled ; heaven is a home , and a rest will not fail me ; god is a friend to the poor orphan child . "
" come , miss jane , do n't cry , " said bessie as she finished .
in the course of the morning mr . lloyd came again .
" what , already up ! " said he , as he entered the nursery .
" well , nurse , how is she ? "
bessie answered that i was doing very well .
" then she ought to look more cheerful .
come here , miss jane : your name is jane , is it not ? "
" yes , sir , jane eyre . "
have you any pain ? "
" no , sir . " " oh !
i daresay she is crying because she could not go out with missis in the carriage , " interposed bessie .
" surely not ! why , she is too old for such pettishness . "
" oh fie , miss ! " said bessie .
the good apothecary appeared a little puzzled .
having considered me at leisure , he said--
" what made you ill yesterday ? "
" she had a fall , " said bessie , again putting in her word .
" fall ! why , that is like a baby again !
ca n't she manage to walk at her age ?
she must be eight or nine years old . "
" i was knocked down , " was the blunt explanation , jerked out of me by another pang of mortified pride ; " but that did not make me ill , " i added ; while mr . lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff .
as he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket , a loud bell rang for the servants ' dinner ; he knew what it was .
bessie would rather have stayed , but she was obliged to go , because punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at gateshead hall .
" the fall did not make you ill ; what did , then ? " pursued mr . lloyd when bessie was gone .
" i was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark . "
i saw mr . lloyd smile and frown at the same time .
" ghost ! what , you are a baby after all ! you are afraid of ghosts ? "
" of mr . reed 's ghost i am : he died in that room , and was laid out there .
neither bessie nor any one else will go into it at night , if they can help it ; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without a candle,--so cruel that i think i shall never forget it . "
" nonsense ! and is it that makes you so miserable ?
are you afraid now in daylight ? "
" no : but night will come again before long : and besides,--i am unhappy,--very unhappy , for other things . "
" what other things ?
can you tell me some of them ? "
fearful , however , of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving my grief by imparting it , i , after a disturbed pause , contrived to frame a meagre , though , as far as it went , true response .
" for one thing , i have no father or mother , brothers or sisters . "
" you have a kind aunt and cousins . "
again i paused ; then bunglingly enounced--
" but john reed knocked me down , and my aunt shut me up in the red - room . "
mr . lloyd a second time produced his snuff - box .
" do n't you think gateshead hall a very beautiful house ? " asked he . " are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at ? "
" it is not my house , sir ; and abbot says i have less right to be here than a servant . "
" pooh ! you ca n't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place ? "
" perhaps you may -- who knows ?
have you any relations besides mrs . reed ? "
" i think not , sir . "
" none belonging to your father ? "
" i do n't know . i asked aunt reed once , and she said possibly i might have some poor , low relations called eyre , but she knew nothing about them . "
" if you had such , would you like to go to them ? "
i reflected .
" no ; i should not like to belong to poor people , " was my reply .
" not even if they were kind to you ? "
" but are your relatives so very poor ?
are they working people ? "
" i can not tell ; aunt reed says if i have any , they must be a beggarly set : i should not like to go a begging . "
" would you like to go to school ? "
besides , school would be a complete change : it implied a long journey , an entire separation from gateshead , an entrance into a new life .
" i should indeed like to go to school , " was the audible conclusion of my musings .
" well , well ! who knows what may happen ? " said mr . lloyd , as he got up .
" the child ought to have change of air and scene , " he added , speaking to himself ; " nerves not in a good state . "
bessie now returned ; at the same moment the carriage was heard rolling up the gravel - walk .
" is that your mistress , nurse ? " asked mr . lloyd .
" i should like to speak to her before i go . "
bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast - room , and led the way out .
in the interview which followed between him and mrs . reed , i presume , from after - occurrences , that the apothecary ventured to recommend my being sent to school ; and the recommendation was no doubt readily enough adopted ; for as abbot said , in discussing the subject with bessie when both sat sewing in the nursery one night , after i was in bed , and , as they thought , asleep , " missis was , she dared say , glad enough to get rid of such a tiresome , ill - conditioned child , who always looked as if she were watching everybody , and scheming plots underhand . "
bessie , when she heard this narrative , sighed and said , " poor miss jane is to be pitied , too , abbot . "
" yes , " responded abbot ; " if she were a nice , pretty child , one might compassionate her forlornness ; but one really can not care for such a little toad as that . "
" so could i -- with a roast onion . come , we 'll go down . "
they went .
chapter iv
i had indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard a blow as my knuckles could inflict ; and when i saw that either that or my look daunted him , i had the greatest inclination to follow up my advantage to purpose ; but he was already with his mama . i heard him in a blubbering tone commence the tale of how " that nasty jane eyre " had flown at him like a mad cat : he was stopped rather harshly--
" do n't talk to me about her , john : i told you not to go near her ; she is not worthy of notice ; i do not choose that either you or your sisters should associate with her . "
here , leaning over the banister , i cried out suddenly , and without at all deliberating on my words--
" they are not fit to associate with me . "
mrs . reed was rather a stout woman ; but , on hearing this strange and audacious declaration , she ran nimbly up the stair , swept me like a whirlwind into the nursery , and crushing me down on the edge of my crib , dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place , or utter one syllable during the remainder of the day .
" what would uncle reed say to you , if he were alive ? " was my scarcely voluntary demand .
i was now in for it .
" my uncle reed is in heaven , and can see all you do and think ; and so can papa and mama : they know how you shut me up all day long , and how you wish me dead . "
mrs . reed soon rallied her spirits : she shook me most soundly , she boxed both my ears , and then left me without a word .
bessie supplied the hiatus by a homily of an hour 's length , in which she proved beyond a doubt that i was the most wicked and abandoned child ever reared under a roof .
i half believed her ; for i felt indeed only bad feelings surging in my breast .
november , december , and half of january passed away .
christmas and the new year had been celebrated at gateshead with the usual festive cheer ; presents had been interchanged , dinners and evening parties given .
it puzzles me now to remember with what absurd sincerity i doated on this little toy , half fancying it alive and capable of sensation . i could not sleep unless it was folded in my night - gown ; and when it lay there safe and warm , i was comparatively happy , believing it to be happy likewise .
from this window were visible the porter 's lodge and the carriage - road , and just as i had dissolved so much of the silver - white foliage veiling the panes as left room to look out , i saw the gates thrown open and a carriage roll through .
i watched it ascending the drive with indifference ; carriages often came to gateshead , but none ever brought visitors in whom i was interested ; it stopped in front of the house , the door - bell rang loudly , the new - comer was admitted .
all this being nothing to me , my vacant attention soon found livelier attraction in the spectacle of a little hungry robin , which came and chirruped on the twigs of the leafless cherry - tree nailed against the wall near the casement .
" miss jane , take off your pinafore ; what are you doing there ?
have you washed your hands and face this morning ? "
i gave another tug before i answered , for i wanted the bird to be secure of its bread : the sash yielded ; i scattered the crumbs , some on the stone sill , some on the cherry - tree bough , then , closing the window , i replied--
" no , bessie ; i have only just finished dusting . "
" troublesome , careless child ! and what are you doing now ?
i would have asked who wanted me : i would have demanded if mrs . reed was there ; but bessie was already gone , and had closed the nursery - door upon me .
" who could want me ? " i asked inwardly , as with both hands i turned the stiff door - handle , which , for a second or two , resisted my efforts .
" ten years . "
" jane eyre , sir . "
in uttering these words i looked up : he seemed to me a tall gentleman ; but then i was very little ; his features were large , and they and all the lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim .
" well , jane eyre , and are you a good child ? "
impossible to reply to this in the affirmative : my little world held a contrary opinion : i was silent .
mrs . reed answered for me by an expressive shake of the head , adding soon , " perhaps the less said on that subject the better , mr . brocklehurst . "
" sorry indeed to hear it ! she and i must have some talk ; " and bending from the perpendicular , he installed his person in the arm - chair opposite mrs . reed 's .
" come here , " he said .
i stepped across the rug ; he placed me square and straight before him .
what a face he had , now that it was almost on a level with mine ! what a great nose ! and what a mouth ! and what large prominent teeth !
" no sight so sad as that of a naughty child , " he began , " especially a naughty little girl .
do you know where the wicked go after death ? "
" they go to hell , " was my ready and orthodox answer .
" and what is hell ? can you tell me that ? "
" a pit full of fire . "
" no , sir . "
" what must you do to avoid it ? "
i deliberated a moment ; my answer , when it did come , was objectionable : " i must keep in good health , and not die . "
" how can you keep in good health ? children younger than you die daily .
i buried a little child of five years old only a day or two since,--a good little child , whose soul is now in heaven . it is to be feared the same could not be said of you were you to be called hence . "
not being in a condition to remove his doubt , i only cast my eyes down on the two large feet planted on the rug , and sighed , wishing myself far enough away .
" i hope that sigh is from the heart , and that you repent of ever having been the occasion of discomfort to your excellent benefactress . "
" benefactress ! benefactress ! " said i inwardly : " they all call mrs . reed my benefactress ; if so , a benefactress is a disagreeable thing . "
" do you say your prayers night and morning ? " continued my interrogator .
" yes , sir . "
" do you read your bible ? "
" sometimes . "
" with pleasure ? are you fond of it ? "
" i like revelations , and the book of daniel , and genesis and samuel , and a little bit of exodus , and some parts of kings and chronicles , and job and jonah . "
" and the psalms ? i hope you like them ? "
" no , sir . "
" no ? oh , shocking !
" psalms are not interesting , " i remarked .
i mention this in your hearing , jane , that you may not attempt to impose on mr . brocklehurst . "
" nothing , indeed , " thought i , as i struggled to repress a sob , and hastily wiped away some tears , the impotent evidences of my anguish .
" i should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting her prospects , " continued my benefactress ; " to be made useful , to be kept humble : as for the vacations , she will , with your permission , spend them always at lowood . "
" your decisions are perfectly judicious , madam , " returned mr . brocklehurst . " humility is a christian grace , and one peculiarly appropriate to the pupils of lowood ; i , therefore , direct that especial care shall be bestowed on its cultivation amongst them .
i have studied how best to mortify in them the worldly sentiment of pride ; and , only the other day , i had a pleasing proof of my success .
" this is the state of things i quite approve , " returned mrs . reed ; " had i sought all england over , i could scarcely have found a system more exactly fitting a child like jane eyre .
consistency , my dear mr . brocklehurst ; i advocate consistency in all things . "
" quite right , sir . i may then depend upon this child being received as a pupil at lowood , and there being trained in conformity to her position and prospects ? "
" madam , you may : she shall be placed in that nursery of chosen plants , and i trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimable privilege of her election . "
" i will send her , then , as soon as possible , mr . brocklehurst ; for , i assure you , i feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility that was becoming too irksome . "
" no doubt , no doubt , madam ; and now i wish you good morning .
i shall return to brocklehurst hall in the course of a week or two : my good friend , the archdeacon , will not permit me to leave him sooner . i shall send miss temple notice that she is to expect a new girl , so that there will be no difficulty about receiving her .
good - bye . "
" good - bye , mr . brocklehurst ; remember me to mrs . and miss brocklehurst , and to augusta and theodore , and master broughton brocklehurst . "
" i will , madam .
sitting on a low stool , a few yards from her arm - chair , i examined her figure ; i perused her features .
in my hand i held the tract containing the sudden death of the liar , to which narrative my attention had been pointed as to an appropriate warning .
" go out of the room ; return to the nursery , " was her mandate .
my look or something else must have struck her as offensive , for she spoke with extreme though suppressed irritation .
i got up , i went to the door ; i came back again ; i walked to the window , across the room , then close up to her .
_ speak _ i must : i had been trodden on severely , and _ must _ turn : but how ?
what strength had i to dart retaliation at my antagonist ?
" i am not deceitful : if i were , i should say i loved you ; but i declare i do not love you : i dislike you the worst of anybody in the world except john reed ; and this book about the liar , you may give to your girl , georgiana , for it is she who tells lies , and not i. "
mrs . reed 's hands still lay on her work inactive : her eye of ice continued to dwell freezingly on mine .
that eye of hers , that voice stirred every antipathy i had .
shaking from head to foot , thrilled with ungovernable excitement , i continued--
" how dare you affirm that , jane eyre ? "
" how dare i , mrs . reed ? how dare i ? because it is the _ truth _ .
' have mercy ! have mercy , aunt reed ! ' and that punishment you made me suffer because your wicked boy struck me -- knocked me down for nothing .
i will tell anybody who asks me questions , this exact tale .
ere i had finished this reply , my soul began to expand , to exult , with the strangest sense of freedom , of triumph , i ever felt .
it seemed as if an invisible bond had burst , and that i had struggled out into unhoped- for liberty .
not without cause was this sentiment : mrs . reed looked frightened ; her work had slipped from her knee ; she was lifting up her hands , rocking herself to and fro , and even twisting her face as if she would cry .
" jane , you are under a mistake : what is the matter with you ?
why do you tremble so violently ? would you like to drink some water ? "
" no , mrs . reed . "
" is there anything else you wish for , jane ?
i assure you , i desire to be your friend . "
" not you . you told mr . brocklehurst i had a bad character , a deceitful disposition ; and i 'll let everybody at lowood know what you are , and what you have done . "
" deceit is not my fault ! " i cried out in a savage , high voice .
" but you are passionate , jane , that you must allow : and now return to the nursery -- there 's a dear -- and lie down a little . "
something of vengeance i had tasted for the first time ; as aromatic wine it seemed , on swallowing , warm and racy : its after - flavour , metallic and corroding , gave me a sensation as if i had been poisoned .
willingly would i now have gone and asked mrs . reed 's pardon ; but i knew , partly from experience and partly from instinct , that was the way to make her repulse me with double scorn , thereby re - exciting every turbulent impulse of my nature .
i would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fierce speaking ; fain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling than that of sombre indignation .
i took a book -- some arabian tales ; i sat down and endeavoured to read . i could make no sense of the subject ; my own thoughts swam always between me and the page i had usually found fascinating .
i opened the glass - door in the breakfast - room : the shrubbery was quite still : the black frost reigned , unbroken by sun or breeze , through the grounds .
i stood , a wretched child enough , whispering to myself over and over again , " what shall i do?--what shall i do ? "
all at once i heard a clear voice call , " miss jane ! where are you ? come to lunch ! "
" you naughty little thing ! " she said . " why do n't you come when you are called ? "
i just put my two arms round her and said , " come , bessie ! do n't scold . "
the action was more frank and fearless than any i was habituated to indulge in : somehow it pleased her .
i nodded .
" and wo n't you be sorry to leave poor bessie ? "
" what does bessie care for me ? she is always scolding me . "
" because you 're such a queer , frightened , shy little thing .
you should be bolder . "
" what ! to get more knocks ? "
" nonsense !
" i do n't think you have , bessie . "
" child ! what do you mean ?
what sorrowful eyes you fix on me !
missis intends you to leave gateshead in a day or two , and you shall choose what toys you like to take with you . "
" bessie , you must promise not to scold me any more till i go . "
" well , i will ; but mind you are a very good girl , and do n't be afraid of me .
do n't start when i chance to speak rather sharply ; it 's so provoking . "
" if you dread them they 'll dislike you . "
" as you do , bessie ? "
" i do n't dislike you , miss ; i believe i am fonder of you than of all the others . "
" you do n't show it . "
" you little sharp thing ! you 've got quite a new way of talking .
what makes you so venturesome and hardy ? "
" and so you 're glad to leave me ? "
" just now ! and rather ! how coolly my little lady says it !
bessie stooped ; we mutually embraced , and i followed her into the house quite comforted .
that afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony ; and in the evening bessie told me some of her most enchanting stories , and sang me some of her sweetest songs .
chapter v
five o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th of january , when bessie brought a candle into my closet and found me already up and nearly dressed .
i was to leave gateshead that day by a coach which passed the lodge gates at six a.m.
bessie was the only person yet risen ; she had lit a fire in the nursery , where she now proceeded to make my breakfast .
few children can eat when excited with the thoughts of a journey ; nor could i. bessie , having pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she had prepared for me , wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them into my bag ; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet , and wrapping herself in a shawl , she and i left the nursery .
as we passed mrs . reed 's bedroom , she said , " will you go in and bid missis good- bye ? "
" what did you say , miss ? "
" nothing : i covered my face with the bedclothes , and turned from her to the wall . "
" that was wrong , miss jane . "
" it was quite right , bessie .
your missis has not been my friend : she has been my foe . "
" o miss jane ! do n't say so ! "
" good - bye to gateshead ! " cried i , as we passed through the hall and went out at the front door .
the moon was set , and it was very dark ; bessie carried a lantern , whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road sodden by a recent thaw . raw and chill was the winter morning : my teeth chattered as i hastened down the drive .
" is she going by herself ? " asked the porter 's wife .
" yes . "
" and how far is it ? "
" fifty miles . "
" what a long way ! i wonder mrs . reed is not afraid to trust her so far alone . "
the coach drew up ; there it was at the gates with its four horses and its top laden with passengers : the guard and coachman loudly urged haste ; my trunk was hoisted up ; i was taken from bessie 's neck , to which i clung with kisses .
" be sure and take good care of her , " cried she to the guard , as he lifted me into the inside .
" ay , ay ! " was the answer : the door was slapped to , a voice exclaimed " all right , " and on we drove .
i remember but little of the journey ; i only know that the day seemed to me of a preternatural length , and that we appeared to travel over hundreds of miles of road .
we passed through several towns , and in one , a very large one , the coach stopped ; the horses were taken out , and the passengers alighted to dine .
i was carried into an inn , where the guard wanted me to have some dinner ; but , as i had no appetite , he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at each end , a chandelier pendent from the ceiling , and a little red gallery high up against the wall filled with musical instruments .
here i walked about for a long time , feeling very strange , and mortally apprehensive of some one coming in and kidnapping me ; for i believed in kidnappers , their exploits having frequently figured in bessie 's fireside chronicles .
at last the guard returned ; once more i was stowed away in the coach , my protector mounted his own seat , sounded his hollow horn , and away we rattled over the " stony street " of l- .
" is there a little girl called jane eyre here ? " she asked .
i answered " yes , " and was then lifted out ; my trunk was handed down , and the coach instantly drove away .
i was puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall , when the door opened , and an individual carrying a light entered ; another followed close behind .
the first was a tall lady with dark hair , dark eyes , and a pale and large forehead ; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl , her countenance was grave , her bearing erect .
" the child is very young to be sent alone , " said she , putting her candle down on the table .
she considered me attentively for a minute or two , then further added--
" a little , ma'am . "
is this the first time you have left your parents to come to school , my little girl ? "
the lady i had left might be about twenty - nine ; the one who went with me appeared some years younger : the first impressed me by her voice , look , and air .
miss miller was more ordinary ; ruddy in complexion , though of a careworn countenance ; hurried in gait and action , like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand : she looked , indeed , what i afterwards found she really was , an under - teacher .
miss miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door , then walking up to the top of the long room she cried out--
" monitors , collect the lesson - books and put them away ! "
four tall girls arose from different tables , and going round , gathered the books and removed them .
miss miller again gave the word of command--
the portions were handed round ; those who liked took a draught of the water , the mug being common to all .
the meal over , prayers were read by miss miller , and the classes filed off , two and two , upstairs .
to - night i was to be miss miller 's bed - fellow ; she helped me to undress : when laid down i glanced at the long rows of beds , each of which was quickly filled with two occupants ; in ten minutes the single light was extinguished , and amidst silence and complete darkness i fell asleep .
the night passed rapidly . i was too tired even to dream ; i only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts , and the rain fall in torrents , and to be sensible that miss miller had taken her place by my side .
when i again unclosed my eyes , a loud bell was ringing ; the girls were up and dressing ; day had not yet begun to dawn , and a rushlight or two burned in the room .
again the bell rang : all formed in file , two and two , and in that order descended the stairs and entered the cold and dimly lit schoolroom : here prayers were read by miss miller ; afterwards she called out--
" form classes ! "
a great tumult succeeded for some minutes , during which miss miller repeatedly exclaimed , " silence ! " and " order ! "
a distant bell tinkled : immediately three ladies entered the room , each walked to a table and took her seat .
business now began , the day 's collect was repeated , then certain texts of scripture were said , and to these succeeded a protracted reading of chapters in the bible , which lasted an hour .
by the time that exercise was terminated , day had fully dawned .
i was now nearly sick from inanition , having taken so little the day before .
the refectory was a great , low - ceiled , gloomy room ; on two long tables smoked basins of something hot , which , however , to my dismay , sent forth an odour far from inviting .
" disgusting ! the porridge is burnt again ! "
a long grace was said and a hymn sung ; then a servant brought in some tea for the teachers , and the meal began .
breakfast was over , and none had breakfasted . thanks being returned for what we had not got , and a second hymn chanted , the refectory was evacuated for the schoolroom .
" abominable stuff ! how shameful ! "
the whole conversation ran on the breakfast , which one and all abused roundly .
poor things ! it was the sole consolation they had .
miss miller was now the only teacher in the room : a group of great girls standing about her spoke with serious and sullen gestures .
i heard the name of mr . brocklehurst pronounced by some lips ; at which miss miller shook her head disapprovingly ; but she made no great effort to check the general wrath ; doubtless she shared in it .
a clock in the schoolroom struck nine ; miss miller left her circle , and standing in the middle of the room , cried--
" silence ! to your seats ! "
discipline prevailed : in five minutes the confused throng was resolved into order , and comparative silence quelled the babel clamour of tongues .
the upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts : but still , all seemed to wait .
above twenty of those clad in this costume were full - grown girls , or rather young women ; it suited them ill , and gave an air of oddity even to the prettiest .
she stood at the bottom of the long room , on the hearth ; for there was a fire at each end ; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely .
miss miller approaching , seemed to ask her a question , and having received her answer , went back to her place , and said aloud--
" monitor of the first class , fetch the globes ! "
let the reader add , to complete the picture , refined features ; a complexion , if pale , clear ; and a stately air and carriage , and he will have , at least , as clearly as words can give it , a correct idea of the exterior of miss temple -- maria temple , as i afterwards saw the name written in a prayer - book intrusted to me to carry to church .
the superintendent of lowood ( for such was this lady ) having taken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables , summoned the first class round her , and commenced giving a lesson on geography ; the lower classes were called by the teachers : repetitions in history , grammar , & c. , went on for an hour ; writing and arithmetic succeeded , and music lessons were given by miss temple to some of the elder girls .
the duration of each lesson was measured by the clock , which at last struck twelve . the superintendent rose--
" i have a word to address to the pupils , " said she .
the tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth , but it sank at her voice .
the teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise .
" it is to be done on my responsibility , " she added , in an explanatory tone to them , and immediately afterwards left the room .
the bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed , to the high delight and refreshment of the whole school .
the order was now given " to the garden ! " each put on a coarse straw bonnet , with strings of coloured calico , and a cloak of grey frieze . i was similarly equipped , and , following the stream , i made my way into the open air .
the garden was a wide inclosure , surrounded with walls so high as to exclude every glimpse of prospect ; a covered verandah ran down one side , and broad walks bordered a middle space divided into scores of little beds : these beds were assigned as gardens for the pupils to cultivate , and each bed had an owner .
the stronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active games , but sundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth in the verandah ; and amongst these , as the dense mist penetrated to their shivering frames , i heard frequently the sound of a hollow cough .
" lowood institution.--this portion was rebuilt a.d . --- , by naomi brocklehurst , of brocklehurst hall , in this county . "
" let your light so shine before men , that they may see your good works , and glorify your father which is in heaven . "--st .
matt . v. 16 .
i was still pondering the signification of " institution , " and endeavouring to make out a connection between the first words and the verse of scripture , when the sound of a cough close behind me made me turn my head .
in turning a leaf she happened to look up , and i said to her directly--
" is your book interesting ? " i had already formed the intention of asking her to lend it to me some day .
" i like it , " she answered , after a pause of a second or two , during which she examined me .
" what is it about ? " i continued .
" you may look at it , " replied the girl , offering me the book .
i did so ; a brief examination convinced me that the contents were less taking than the title : " rasselas " looked dull to my trifling taste ; i saw nothing about fairies , nothing about genii ; no bright variety seemed spread over the closely - printed pages .
" can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the door means ?
what is lowood institution ? "
" this house where you are come to live . "
" and why do they call it institution ?
is it in any way different from other schools ? "
" it is partly a charity - school : you and i , and all the rest of us , are charity - children . i suppose you are an orphan : are not either your father or your mother dead ? "
" do we pay no money ? do they keep us for nothing ? "
" we pay , or our friends pay , fifteen pounds a year for each . "
" then why do they call us charity - children ? "
" who subscribes ? "
" different benevolent - minded ladies and gentlemen in this neighbourhood and in london . "
" who was naomi brocklehurst ? "
" the lady who built the new part of this house as that tablet records , and whose son overlooks and directs everything here . "
" why ? "
" because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment . "
" then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears a watch , and who said we were to have some bread and cheese ? "
" to miss temple ? oh , no !
i wish it did : she has to answer to mr . brocklehurst for all she does .
mr . brocklehurst buys all our food and all our clothes . "
" does he live here ? "
" no -- two miles off , at a large hall . "
" is he a good man ? "
" he is a clergyman , and is said to do a great deal of good . "
" did you say that tall lady was called miss temple ? "
" yes . "
" and what are the other teachers called ? "
" do you like the teachers ? "
" well enough . "
" do you like the little black one , and the madame ---?--i can not pronounce her name as you do . "
" miss scatcherd is hasty -- you must take care not to offend her ; madame pierrot is not a bad sort of person . "
" but miss temple is the best -- isn't she ? "
" miss temple is very good and very clever ; she is above the rest , because she knows far more than they do . "
" have you been long here ? "
" two years . "
" are you an orphan ? "
" my mother is dead . "
" are you happy here ? "
but at that moment the summons sounded for dinner ; all re - entered the house .
i found the mess to consist of indifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat , mixed and cooked together .
of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful was apportioned to each pupil . i ate what i could , and wondered within myself whether every day 's fare would be like this .
after dinner , we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom : lessons recommenced , and were continued till five o'clock .
the only marked event of the afternoon was , that i saw the girl with whom i had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace by miss scatcherd from a history class , and sent to stand in the middle of the large schoolroom .
i have heard of day - dreams -- is she in a day - dream now ?
soon after five p.m. we had another meal , consisting of a small mug of coffee , and half - a - slice of brown bread . i devoured my bread and drank my coffee with relish ; but i should have been glad of as much more -- i was still hungry .
such was my first day at lowood .
chapter vi
before the long hour and a half of prayers and bible - reading was over , i felt ready to perish with cold .
breakfast - time came at last , and this morning the porridge was not burnt ; the quality was eatable , the quantity small .
how small my portion seemed ! i wished it had been doubled .
at first , being little accustomed to learn by heart , the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult ; the frequent change from task to task , too , bewildered me ; and i was glad when , about three o'clock in the afternoon , miss smith put into my hands a border of muslin two yards long , together with needle , thimble , & c. , and sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom , with directions to hem the same .
at that hour most of the others were sewing likewise ; but one class still stood round miss scatcherd 's chair reading , and as all was quiet , the subject of their lessons could be heard , together with the manner in which each girl acquitted herself , and the animadversions or commendations of miss scatcherd on the performance .
a chapter having been read through twice , the books were closed and the girls examined .
i kept expecting that miss scatcherd would praise her attention ; but , instead of that , she suddenly cried out--
" you dirty , disagreeable girl ! you have never cleaned your nails this morning ! "
burns made no answer : i wondered at her silence .
" why , " thought i , " does she not explain that she could neither clean her nails nor wash her face , as the water was frozen ? "
not a tear rose to burns ' eye ; and , while i paused from my sewing , because my fingers quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotent anger , not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinary expression .
" hardened girl ! " exclaimed miss scatcherd ; " nothing can correct you of your slatternly habits : carry the rod away . "
burns obeyed : i looked at her narrowly as she emerged from the book - closet ; she was just putting back her handkerchief into her pocket , and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek .
" is it still ' rasselas ' ? " i asked , coming behind her .
" yes , " she said , " and i have just finished it . "
and in five minutes more she shut it up . i was glad of this .
" now , " thought i , " i can perhaps get her to talk . " i sat down by her on the floor .
" what is your name besides burns ? "
" helen . "
" do you come a long way from here ? "
" i come from a place farther north , quite on the borders of scotland . "
" will you ever go back ? "
" i hope so ; but nobody can be sure of the future . "
" you must wish to leave lowood ? "
" no ! why should i ?
" but that teacher , miss scatcherd , is so cruel to you ? " " cruel ?
not at all ! she is severe : she dislikes my faults . "
" probably you would do nothing of the sort : but if you did , mr . brocklehurst would expel you from the school ; that would be a great grief to your relations .
i heard her with wonder : i could not comprehend this doctrine of endurance ; and still less could i understand or sympathise with the forbearance she expressed for her chastiser .
" you say you have faults , helen : what are they ?
to me you seem very good . "
this is all very provoking to miss scatcherd , who is naturally neat , punctual , and particular . "
" and cross and cruel , " i added ; but helen burns would not admit my addition : she kept silence .
" is miss temple as severe to you as miss scatcherd ? "
at the utterance of miss temple 's name , a soft smile flitted over her grave face .
" that is curious , " said i , " it is so easy to be careful . "
" for _ you _ i have no doubt it is . i observed you in your class this morning , and saw you were closely attentive : your thoughts never seemed to wander while miss miller explained the lesson and questioned you .
" yet how well you replied this afternoon . "
" it was mere chance ; the subject on which we had been reading had interested me .
still , i like charles -- i respect him -- i pity him , poor murdered king ! yes , his enemies were the worst : they shed blood they had no right to shed .
how dared they kill him ! "
helen was talking to herself now : she had forgotten i could not very well understand her -- that i was ignorant , or nearly so , of the subject she discussed . i recalled her to my level .
" and when miss temple teaches you , do your thoughts wander then ? "
" no , certainly , not often ; because miss temple has generally something to say which is newer than my own reflections ; her language is singularly agreeable to me , and the information she communicates is often just what i wished to gain . "
" well , then , with miss temple you are good ? "
" a great deal : you are good to those who are good to you . it is all i ever desire to be .
" you will change your mind , i hope , when you grow older : as yet you are but a little untaught girl . "
" but i feel this , helen ; i must dislike those who , whatever i do to please them , persist in disliking me ; i must resist those who punish me unjustly . it is as natural as that i should love those who show me affection , or submit to punishment when i feel it is deserved . "
" heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine , but christians and civilised nations disown it . "
" how ? i do n't understand . "
" it is not violence that best overcomes hate -- nor vengeance that most certainly heals injury . "
" what then ? "
" read the new testament , and observe what christ says , and how he acts ; make his word your rule , and his conduct your example . "
" what does he say ? "
" love your enemies ; bless them that curse you ; do good to them that hate you and despitefully use you . "
" then i should love mrs . reed , which i can not do ; i should bless her son john , which is impossible . "
in her turn , helen burns asked me to explain , and i proceeded forthwith to pour out , in my own way , the tale of my sufferings and resentments .
helen heard me patiently to the end : i expected she would then make a remark , but she said nothing .
what a singularly deep impression her injustice seems to have made on your heart !
would you not be happier if you tried to forget her severity , together with the passionate emotions it excited ?
" helen burns , if you do n't go and put your drawer in order , and fold up your work this minute , i 'll tell miss scatcherd to come and look at it ! "
helen sighed as her reverie fled , and getting up , obeyed the monitor without reply as without delay .
chapter vii
the fear of failure in these points harassed me worse than the physical hardships of my lot ; though these were no trifles .
then the scanty supply of food was distressing : with the keen appetites of growing children , we had scarcely sufficient to keep alive a delicate invalid .
sundays were dreary days in that wintry season .
we had to walk two miles to brocklebridge church , where our patron officiated .
we set out cold , we arrived at church colder : during the morning service we became almost paralysed .
the other teachers , poor things , were generally themselves too much dejected to attempt the task of cheering others .
how we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire when we got back !
but , to the little ones at least , this was denied : each hearth in the schoolroom was immediately surrounded by a double row of great girls , and behind them the younger children crouched in groups , wrapping their starved arms in their pinafores .
i generally contrived to reserve a moiety of this bounteous repast for myself ; but the remainder i was invariably obliged to part with .
i need not say that i had my own reasons for dreading his coming : but come he did at last .
" your directions shall be attended to , sir , " said miss temple .
" and , ma'am , " he continued , " the laundress tells me some of the girls have two clean tuckers in the week : it is too much ; the rules limit them to one . "
" i think i can explain that circumstance , sir .
agnes and catherine johnstone were invited to take tea with some friends at lowton last thursday , and i gave them leave to put on clean tuckers for the occasion . " mr . brocklehurst nodded .
" well , for once it may pass ; but please not to let the circumstance occur too often .
and there is another thing which surprised me ; i find , in settling accounts with the housekeeper , that a lunch , consisting of bread and cheese , has twice been served out to the girls during the past fortnight . how is this ?
i looked over the regulations , and i find no such meal as lunch mentioned .
who introduced this innovation ? and by what authority ? "
" madam , allow me an instant .
you are aware that my plan in bringing up these girls is , not to accustom them to habits of luxury and indulgence , but to render them hardy , patient , self - denying .
oh , madam , when you put bread and cheese , instead of burnt porridge , into these children 's mouths , you may indeed feed their vile bodies , but you little think how you starve their immortal souls ! "
mr . brocklehurst again paused -- perhaps overcome by his feelings .
suddenly his eye gave a blink , as if it had met something that either dazzled or shocked its pupil ; turning , he said in more rapid accents than he had hitherto used--
" miss temple , miss temple , what--_what _ is that girl with curled hair ? red hair , ma'am , curled -- curled all over ? "
and extending his cane he pointed to the awful object , his hand shaking as he did so .
" it is julia severn , " replied miss temple , very quietly .
i have again and again intimated that i desire the hair to be arranged closely , modestly , plainly .
he scrutinised the reverse of these living medals some five minutes , then pronounced sentence . these words fell like the knell of doom--
" all those top - knots must be cut off . "
miss temple seemed to remonstrate .
it seems they had come in the carriage with their reverend relative , and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the room upstairs , while he transacted business with the housekeeper , questioned the laundress , and lectured the superintendent .
to this end , i had sat well back on the form , and while seeming to be busy with my sum , had held my slate in such a manner as to conceal my face : i might have escaped notice , had not my treacherous slate somehow happened to slip from my hand , and falling with an obtrusive crash , directly drawn every eye upon me ; i knew it was all over now , and , as i stooped to pick up the two fragments of slate , i rallied my forces for the worst . it came .
" let the child who broke her slate come forward ! "
" do n't be afraid , jane , i saw it was an accident ; you shall not be punished . "
the kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger .
" another minute , and she will despise me for a hypocrite , " thought i ; and an impulse of fury against reed , brocklehurst , and co. bounded in my pulses at the conviction . i was no helen burns .
mr . brocklehurst hemmed . " ladies , " said he , turning to his family , " miss temple , teachers , and children , you all see this girl ? "
of course they did ; for i felt their eyes directed like burning - glasses against my scorched skin .
who would think that the evil one had already found a servant and agent in her ?
yet such , i grieve to say , is the case . "
teachers , you must watch her : keep your eyes on her movements , weigh well her words , scrutinise her actions , punish her body to save her soul : if , indeed , such salvation be possible , for ( my tongue falters while i tell it ) this girl , this child , the native of a christian land , worse than many a little heathen who says its prayers to brahma and kneels before juggernaut -- this girl is -- a liar ! "
with this sublime conclusion , mr . brocklehurst adjusted the top button of his surtout , muttered something to his family , who rose , bowed to miss temple , and then all the great people sailed in state from the room .
turning at the door , my judge said--
" let her stand half - an - hour longer on that stool , and let no one speak to her during the remainder of the day . "
there was i , then , mounted aloft ; i , who had said i could not bear the shame of standing on my natural feet in the middle of the room , was now exposed to general view on a pedestal of infamy .
what my sensations were no language can describe ; but just as they all rose , stifling my breath and constricting my throat , a girl came up and passed me : in passing , she lifted her eyes .
it was as if a martyr , a hero , had passed a slave or victim , and imparted strength in the transit .
i mastered the rising hysteria , lifted up my head , and took a firm stand on the stool .
what a smile !
chapter viii
i now ventured to descend : it was deep dusk ; i retired into a corner and sat down on the floor .
i had meant to be so good , and to do so much at lowood : to make so many friends , to earn respect and win affection .
she sat down on the ground near me , embraced her knees with her arms , and rested her head upon them ; in that attitude she remained silent as an indian .
i was the first who spoke--
" helen , why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believes to be a liar ? "
" everybody , jane ?
why , there are only eighty people who have heard you called so , and the world contains hundreds of millions . "
" but what have i to do with millions ? the eighty , i know , despise me . "
" jane , you are mistaken : probably not one in the school either despises or dislikes you : many , i am sure , pity you much . "
" how can they pity me after what mr . brocklehurst has said ? "
besides , jane"--she paused .
" well , helen ? " said i , putting my hand into hers : she chafed my fingers gently to warm them , and went on--
why , then , should we ever sink overwhelmed with distress , when life is so soon over , and death is so certain an entrance to happiness -- to glory ? "
some heavy clouds , swept from the sky by a rising wind , had left the moon bare ; and her light , streaming in through a window near , shone full both on us and on the approaching figure , which we at once recognised as miss temple .
we went ; following the superintendent 's guidance , we had to thread some intricate passages , and mount a staircase before we reached her apartment ; it contained a good fire , and looked cheerful .
miss temple told helen burns to be seated in a low arm - chair on one side of the hearth , and herself taking another , she called me to her side .
" is it all over ? " she asked , looking down at my face . " have you cried your grief away ? "
" i am afraid i never shall do that . "
" why ? "
" because i have been wrongly accused ; and you , ma'am , and everybody else , will now think me wicked . "
" we shall think you what you prove yourself to be , my child .
continue to act as a good girl , and you will satisfy us . "
" shall i , miss temple ? "
" you will , " said she , passing her arm round me . " and now tell me who is the lady whom mr . brocklehurst called your benefactress ? "
" mrs . reed , my uncle 's wife . my uncle is dead , and he left me to her care . "
" did she not , then , adopt you of her own accord ? "
" well now , jane , you know , or at least i will tell you , that when a criminal is accused , he is always allowed to speak in his own defence .
you have been charged with falsehood ; defend yourself to me as well as you can . say whatever your memory suggests is true ; but add nothing and exaggerate nothing . "
i had finished : miss temple regarded me a few minutes in silence ; she then said--
" i know something of mr . lloyd ; i shall write to him ; if his reply agrees with your statement , you shall be publicly cleared from every imputation ; to me , jane , you are clear now . "
" how are you to - night , helen ? have you coughed much to - day ? "
" not quite so much , i think , ma'am . "
" and the pain in your chest ? "
" it is a little better . "
miss temple got up , took her hand and examined her pulse ; then she returned to her own seat : as she resumed it , i heard her sigh low .
she was pensive a few minutes , then rousing herself , she said cheerfully--
" but you two are my visitors to - night ; i must treat you as such . "
she rang her bell .
and a tray was soon brought . how pretty , to my eyes , did the china cups and bright teapot look , placed on the little round table near the fire !
" barbara , " said she , " can you not bring a little more bread and butter ? there is not enough for three . "
barbara went out : she returned soon--
" madam , mrs . harden says she has sent up the usual quantity . "
mrs . harden , be it observed , was the housekeeper : a woman after mr . brocklehurst 's own heart , made up of equal parts of whalebone and iron .
" oh , very well ! " returned miss temple ; " we must make it do , barbara , i suppose . "
we feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia ; and not the least delight of the entertainment was the smile of gratification with which our hostess regarded us , as we satisfied our famished appetites on the delicate fare she liberally supplied .
then her soul sat on her lips , and language flowed , from what source i can not tell .
they conversed of things i had never heard of ; of nations and times past ; of countries far away ; of secrets of nature discovered or guessed at : they spoke of books : how many they had read !
what stores of knowledge they possessed !
" god bless you , my children ! "
helen she held a little longer than me : she let her go more reluctantly ; it was helen her eye followed to the door ; it was for her she a second time breathed a sad sigh ; for her she wiped a tear from her cheek .
" my things were indeed in shameful disorder , " murmured helen to me , in a low voice : " i intended to have arranged them , but i forgot . "
next morning , miss scatcherd wrote in conspicuous characters on a piece of pasteboard the word " slattern , " and bound it like a phylactery round helen 's large , mild , intelligent , and benign - looking forehead .
about a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated , miss temple , who had written to mr . lloyd , received his answer : it appeared that what he said went to corroborate my account .
i learned the first two tenses of the verb _ etre _ , and sketched my first cottage ( whose walls , by - the- bye , outrivalled in slope those of the leaning tower of pisa ) , on the same day .
well has solomon said--"better is a dinner of herbs where love is , than a stalled ox and hatred therewith . "
i would not now have exchanged lowood with all its privations for gateshead and its daily luxuries .
chapter ix
april advanced to may : a bright serene may it was ; days of blue sky , placid sunshine , and soft western or southern gales filled up its duration .
that forest - dell , where lowood lay , was the cradle of fog and fog - bred pestilence ; which , quickening with the quickening spring , crept into the orphan asylum , breathed typhus through its crowded schoolroom and dormitory , and , ere may arrived , transformed the seminary into an hospital .
classes were broken up , rules relaxed .
the few who continued well were allowed almost unlimited license ; because the medical attendant insisted on the necessity of frequent exercise to keep them in health : and had it been otherwise , no one had leisure to watch or restrain them .
many , already smitten , went home only to die : some died at the school , and were buried quietly and quickly , the nature of the malady forbidding delay .
besides , there were fewer to feed ; the sick could eat little ; our breakfast - basins were better filled ; when there was no time to prepare a regular dinner , which often happened , she would give us a large piece of cold pie , or a thick slice of bread and cheese , and this we carried away with us to the wood , where we each chose the spot we liked best , and dined sumptuously .
some years older than i , she knew more of the world , and could tell me many things i liked to hear : with her my curiosity found gratification : to my faults also she gave ample indulgence , never imposing curb or rein on anything i said .
and where , meantime , was helen burns ?
why did i not spend these sweet days of liberty with her ?
how could it be otherwise , when helen , at all times and under all circumstances , evinced for me a quiet and faithful friendship , which ill - humour never soured , nor irritation never troubled ?
when we got back , it was after moonrise : a pony , which we knew to be the surgeon 's , was standing at the garden door . mary ann remarked that she supposed some one must be very ill , as mr . bates had been sent for at that time of the evening .
she went into the house ; i stayed behind a few minutes to plant in my garden a handful of roots i had dug up in the forest , and which i feared would wither if i left them till the morning .
this world is pleasant -- it would be dreary to be called from it , and to have to go who knows where ? "
and then my mind made its first earnest effort to comprehend what had been infused into it concerning heaven and hell ; and for the first time it recoiled , baffled ; and for the first time glancing behind , on each side , and before it , it saw all round an unfathomed gulf : it felt the one point where it stood -- the present ; all the rest was formless cloud and vacant depth ; and it shuddered at the thought of tottering , and plunging amid that chaos .
while pondering this new idea , i heard the front door open ; mr . bates came out , and with him was a nurse .
" how is helen burns ? "
" very poorly , " was the answer .
" is it her mr . bates has been to see ? "
" yes . "
" and what does he say about her ? "
" he says she 'll not be here long . "
this phrase , uttered in my hearing yesterday , would have only conveyed the notion that she was about to be removed to northumberland , to her own home . i should not have suspected that it meant she was dying ; but i knew instantly now !
i experienced a shock of horror , then a strong thrill of grief , then a desire -- a necessity to see her ; and i asked in what room she lay .
" she is in miss temple 's room , " said the nurse .
" may i go up and speak to her ? "
the nurse closed the front door ; i went in by the side entrance which led to the schoolroom : i was just in time ; it was nine o'clock , and miss miller was calling the pupils to go to bed .
an odour of camphor and burnt vinegar warned me when i came near the fever room : and i passed its door quickly , fearful lest the nurse who sat up all night should hear me .
miss temple was not to be seen : i knew afterwards that she had been called to a delirious patient in the fever - room .
she stirred herself , put back the curtain , and i saw her face , pale , wasted , but quite composed : she looked so little changed that my fear was instantly dissipated .
" can it be you , jane ? " she asked , in her own gentle voice .
" oh ! " i thought , " she is not going to die ; they are mistaken : she could not speak and look so calmly if she were . "
" why are you come here , jane ? it is past eleven o'clock : i heard it strike some minutes since . "
" i came to see you , helen : i heard you were very ill , and i could not sleep till i had spoken to you . "
" you came to bid me good - bye , then : you are just in time probably . "
" are you going somewhere , helen ? are you going home ? "
" yes ; to my long home -- my last home . "
" no , no , helen ! " i stopped , distressed .
while i tried to devour my tears , a fit of coughing seized helen ; it did not , however , wake the nurse ; when it was over , she lay some minutes exhausted ; then she whispered--
" jane , your little feet are bare ; lie down and cover yourself with my quilt . "
i did so : she put her arm over me , and i nestled close to her .
after a long silence , she resumed , still whispering--
i leave no one to regret me much : i have only a father ; and he is lately married , and will not miss me .
by dying young , i shall escape great sufferings . i had not qualities or talents to make my way very well in the world : i should have been continually at fault . "
" but where are you going to , helen ?
can you see ? do you know ? "
" i believe ; i have faith : i am going to god . "
god is my father ; god is my friend : i love him ; i believe he loves me . "
" and shall i see you again , helen , when i die ? "
" you will come to the same region of happiness : be received by the same mighty , universal parent , no doubt , dear jane . "
again i questioned , but this time only in thought . " where is that region ? does it exist ? "
presently she said , in the sweetest tone--
" how comfortable i am ! that last fit of coughing has tired me a little ; i feel as if i could sleep : but do n't leave me , jane ; i like to have you near me . "
" i 'll stay with you , _ dear _ helen : no one shall take me away . "
" are you warm , darling ? "
" yes . "
" good - night , jane . "
she kissed me , and i her , and we both soon slumbered .
i was not reprimanded for leaving my bed ; people had something else to think about ; no explanation was afforded then to my many questions ; but a day or two afterwards i learned that miss temple , on returning to her own room at dawn , had found me laid in the little crib ; my face against helen burns 's shoulder , my arms round her neck .
i was asleep , and helen was -- dead .
chapter x
the school , thus improved , became in time a truly useful and noble institution .
during these eight years my life was uniform : but not unhappy , because it was not inactive .
miss temple , through all changes , had thus far continued superintendent of the seminary : to her instruction i owed the best part of my acquirements ; her friendship and society had been my continual solace ; she had stood me in the stead of mother , governess , and , latterly , companion .
from the day she left i was no longer the same : with her was gone every settled feeling , every association that had made lowood in some degree a home to me .
i walked about the chamber most of the time .
i abandoned it and framed a humbler supplication ; for change , stimulus : that petition , too , seemed swept off into vague space : " then , " i cried , half desperate , " grant me at least a new servitude ! "
how i wished sleep would silence her . it seemed as if , could i but go back to the idea which had last entered my mind as i stood at the window , some inventive suggestion would rise for my relief .
miss gryce snored at last ; she was a heavy welshwoman , and till now her habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in any other light than as a nuisance ; to - night i hailed the first deep notes with satisfaction ; i was debarrassed of interruption ; my half - effaced thought instantly revived .
but servitude ! that must be matter of fact .
yes -- yes -- the end is not so difficult ; if i had only a brain active enough to ferret out the means of attaining it . "
i sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain : it was a chilly night ; i covered my shoulders with a shawl , and then i proceeded _ to think _ again with all my might .
" what do i want ?
a new place , in a new house , amongst new faces , under new circumstances : i want this because it is of no use wanting anything better .
how do people do to get a new place ?
they apply to friends , i suppose : i have no friends .
there are many others who have no friends , who must look about for themselves and be their own helpers ; and what is their resource ? "
i could not tell : nothing answered me ; i then ordered my brain to find a response , and quickly .
it worked and worked faster : i felt the pulses throb in my head and temples ; but for nearly an hour it worked in chaos ; and no result came of its efforts .
feverish with vain labour , i got up and took a turn in the room ; undrew the curtain , noted a star or two , shivered with cold , and again crept to bed .
" how ? i know nothing about advertising . "
replies rose smooth and prompt now:--
" a young lady accustomed to tuition " ( had i not been a teacher two years ? ) " is desirous of meeting with a situation in a private family where the children are under fourteen ( i thought that as i was barely eighteen , it would not do to undertake the guidance of pupils nearer my own age ) .
she is qualified to teach the usual branches of a good english education , together with french , drawing , and music " ( in those days , reader , this now narrow catalogue of accomplishments , would have been held tolerably comprehensive ) .
" address , j.e . , post - office , lowton , --- shire . "
this document remained locked in my drawer all day : after tea , i asked leave of the new superintendent to go to lowton , in order to perform some small commissions for myself and one or two of my fellow - teachers ; permission was readily granted ; i went .
it was a walk of two miles , and the evening was wet , but the days were still long ; i visited a shop or two , slipped the letter into the post - office , and came back through heavy rain , with streaming garments , but with a relieved heart .
the succeeding week seemed long : it came to an end at last , however , like all sublunary things , and once more , towards the close of a pleasant autumn day , i found myself afoot on the road to lowton .
" are there any letters for j.e . ? " i asked .
" is there only one ? " i demanded .
" there are no more , " said she ; and i put it in my pocket and turned my face homeward : i could not open it then ; rules obliged me to be back by eight , and it was already half - past seven .
i examined the document long : the writing was old - fashioned and rather uncertain , like that of an elderly lady .
i now felt that an elderly lady was no bad ingredient in the business i had on hand .
here the socket of the candle dropped , and the wick went out .
a note was accordingly addressed to that lady , who returned for answer , that " i might do as i pleased : she had long relinquished all interference in my affairs . "
this testimonial i accordingly received in about a month , forwarded a copy of it to mrs . fairfax , and got that lady 's reply , stating that she was satisfied , and fixing that day fortnight as the period for my assuming the post of governess in her house .
the box was corded , the card nailed on . in half - an - hour the carrier was to call for it to take it to lowton , whither i myself was to repair at an early hour the next morning to meet the coach .
a phase of my life was closing to - night , a new one opening to - morrow : impossible to slumber in the interval ; i must watch feverishly while the change was being accomplished .
" miss , " said a servant who met me in the lobby , where i was wandering like a troubled spirit , " a person below wishes to see you . "
" it 's her , i am sure!--i could have told her anywhere ! " cried the individual who stopped my progress and took my hand .
i looked : i saw a woman attired like a well - dressed servant , matronly , yet still young ; very good - looking , with black hair and eyes , and lively complexion .
" well , who is it ? " she asked , in a voice and with a smile i half recognised ; " you 've not quite forgotten me , i think , miss jane ? "
in another second i was embracing and kissing her rapturously : " bessie !
bessie ! bessie ! " that was all i said ; whereat she half laughed , half cried , and we both went into the parlour .
by the fire stood a little fellow of three years old , in plaid frock and trousers .
" that is my little boy , " said bessie directly .
" then you are married , bessie ? "
" yes ; nearly five years since to robert leaven , the coachman ; and i 've a little girl besides bobby there , that i 've christened jane . "
" and you do n't live at gateshead ? "
" i live at the lodge : the old porter has left . "
" well , and how do they all get on ?
" you 're not grown so very tall , miss jane , nor so very stout , " continued mrs . leaven .
" georgiana is handsome , i suppose , bessie ? "
" very .
it was miss reed that found them out : i believe she was envious ; and now she and her sister lead a cat and dog life together ; they are always quarrelling-- "
" well , and what of john reed ? "
" what does he look like ? "
" he is very tall : some people call him a fine - looking young man ; but he has such thick lips . "
" and mrs . reed ? "
" missis looks stout and well enough in the face , but i think she 's not quite easy in her mind : mr . john 's conduct does not please her -- he spends a deal of money . "
" did she send you here , bessie ? "
" i am afraid you are disappointed in me , bessie . " i said this laughing : i perceived that bessie 's glance , though it expressed regard , did in no shape denote admiration .
" no , miss jane , not exactly : you are genteel enough ; you look like a lady , and it is as much as ever i expected of you : you were no beauty as a child . "
i smiled at bessie 's frank answer : i felt that it was correct , but i confess i was not quite indifferent to its import : at eighteen most people wish to please , and the conviction that they have not an exterior likely to second that desire brings anything but gratification .
" i dare say you are clever , though , " continued bessie , by way of solace . " what can you do ? can you play on the piano ? "
" a little . " there was one in the room ; bessie went and opened it , and then asked me to sit down and give her a tune :
i played a waltz or two , and she was charmed .
" the miss reeds could not play as well ! " said she exultingly . " i always said you would surpass them in learning : and can you draw ? "
" that is one of my paintings over the chimney - piece . "
" yes , bessie , i can both read it and speak it . "
" and you can work on muslin and canvas ? "
" i can . "
there was something i wanted to ask you . have you ever heard anything from your father 's kinsfolk , the eyres ? "
" never in my life . "
he looked quite a gentleman , and i believe he was your father 's brother . "
" what foreign country was he going to , bessie ? "
" madeira ? " i suggested .
" yes , that is it -- that is the very word . "
" so he went ? "
" yes ; he did not stay many minutes in the house : missis was very high with him ; she called him afterwards a ' sneaking tradesman . '
my robert believes he was a wine - merchant . "
bessie and i conversed about old times an hour longer , and then she was obliged to leave me : i saw her again for a few minutes the next morning at lowton , while i was waiting for the coach .
chapter xi
reader , though i look comfortably accommodated , i am not very tranquil in my mind .
nothing of the sort was visible ; and when i asked a waiter if any one had been to inquire after a miss eyre , i was answered in the negative : so i had no resource but to request to be shown into a private room : and here i am waiting , while all sorts of doubts and fears are troubling my thoughts .
i bethought myself to ring the bell .
" is there a place in this neighbourhood called thornfield ? " i asked of the waiter who answered the summons .
" thornfield ? i do n't know , ma'am ; i 'll inquire at the bar . "
he vanished , but reappeared instantly--
" is your name eyre , miss ? "
" yes . "
" person here waiting for you . "
" yes . "
" a matter of six miles . "
" how long shall we be before we get there ? "
" happen an hour and a half . "
" i suppose , " thought i , " judging from the plainness of the servant and carriage , mrs . fairfax is not a very dashing person : so much the better ; i never lived amongst fine people but once , and i was very miserable with them .
at lowood , indeed , i took that resolution , kept it , and succeeded in pleasing ; but with mrs . reed , i remember my best was always spurned with scorn .
we now slowly ascended a drive , and came upon the long front of a house : candlelight gleamed from one curtained bow - window ; all the rest were dark . the car stopped at the front door ; it was opened by a maid - servant ; i alighted and went in .
she was occupied in knitting ; a large cat sat demurely at her feet ; nothing in short was wanting to complete the beau - ideal of domestic comfort .
" how do you do , my dear ? i am afraid you have had a tedious ride ; john drives so slowly ; you must be cold , come to the fire . "
" mrs . fairfax , i suppose ? " said i.
" yes , you are right : do sit down . "
she conducted me to her own chair , and then began to remove my shawl and untie my bonnet - strings ; i begged she would not give herself so much trouble .
and she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch of keys , and delivered them to the servant .
" now , then , draw nearer to the fire , " she continued .
" you 've brought your luggage with you , have n't you , my dear ? "
" yes , ma'am . "
" i 'll see it carried into your room , " she said , and bustled out .
" she treats me like a visitor , " thought i.
" what did you say , my dear ? i am a little deaf , " returned the good lady , approaching her ear to my mouth .
i repeated the question more distinctly .
" miss fairfax ?
oh , you mean miss varens !
varens is the name of your future pupil . "
" indeed ! then she is not your daughter ? "
" no,--i have no family . "
to be sure it is pleasant at any time ; for thornfield is a fine old hall , rather neglected of late years perhaps , but still it is a respectable place ; yet you know in winter - time one feels dreary quite alone in the best quarters .
i say alone -- leah is a nice girl to be sure , and john and his wife are very decent people ; but then you see they are only servants , and one ca n't converse with them on terms of equality : one must keep them at due distance , for fear of losing one 's authority .
my heart really warmed to the worthy lady as i heard her talk ; and i drew my chair a little nearer to her , and expressed my sincere wish that she might find my company as agreeable as she anticipated .
i thanked her for her considerate choice , and as i really felt fatigued with my long journey , expressed my readiness to retire .
she took her candle , and i followed her from the room .
first she went to see if the hall - door was fastened ; having taken the key from the lock , she led the way upstairs .
externals have a great effect on the young : i thought that a fairer era of life was beginning for me , one that was to have its flowers and pleasures , as well as its thorns and toils .
it was not my habit to be disregardful of appearance or careless of the impression i made : on the contrary , i ever wished to look as well as i could , and to please as much as my want of beauty would permit .
i sometimes regretted that i was not handsomer ; i sometimes wished to have rosy cheeks , a straight nose , and small cherry mouth ; i desired to be tall , stately , and finely developed in figure ; i felt it a misfortune that i was so little , so pale , and had features so irregular and so marked .
having opened my chamber window , and seen that i left all things straight and neat on the toilet table , i ventured forth .
traversing the long and matted gallery , i descended the slippery steps of oak ; then i gained the hall : i halted there a minute ; i looked at some pictures on the walls ( one , i remember , represented a grim man in a cuirass , and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace ) , at a bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling , at a great clock whose case was of oak curiously carved , and ebon black with time and rubbing .
everything appeared very stately and imposing to me ; but then i was so little accustomed to grandeur .
the hall - door , which was half of glass , stood open ; i stepped over the threshold .
a little hamlet , whose roofs were blent with trees , straggled up the side of one of these hills ; the church of the district stood nearer thornfield : its old tower - top looked over a knoll between the house and gates .
" what ! out already ? " said she . " i see you are an early riser . "
i went up to her , and was received with an affable kiss and shake of the hand .
" how do you like thornfield ? " she asked .
i told her i liked it very much .
" mr . rochester ! " i exclaimed . " who is he ? "
" the owner of thornfield , " she responded quietly . " did you not know he was called rochester ? "
of course i did not -- i had never heard of him before ; but the old lady seemed to regard his existence as a universally understood fact , with which everybody must be acquainted by instinct .
" i thought , " i continued , " thornfield belonged to you . "
" to me ? bless you , child ; what an idea ! to me ! i am only the housekeeper -- the manager .
" and the little girl -- my pupil ! "
here she comes , with her ' bonne , ' as she calls her nurse . "
the enigma then was explained : this affable and kind little widow was no great dame ; but a dependant like myself .
i did not like her the worse for that ; on the contrary , i felt better pleased than ever .
the equality between her and me was real ; not the mere result of condescension on her part : so much the better -- my position was all the freer .
as i was meditating on this discovery , a little girl , followed by her attendant , came running up the lawn .
" good morning , miss adela , " said mrs . fairfax .
" come and speak to the lady who is to teach you , and to make you a clever woman some day . "
she approached . " c'est la ma gouverante ! " said she , pointing to me , and addressing her nurse ; who answered-- " mais oui , certainement . "
" are they foreigners ? " i inquired , amazed at hearing the french language .
" the nurse is a foreigner , and adela was born on the continent ; and , i believe , never left it till within six months ago .
sophie is my nurse ; she came with me over the sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoked -- how it did smoke!--and i was sick , and so was sophie , and so was mr . rochester .
mr . rochester lay down on a sofa in a pretty room called the salon , and sophie and i had little beds in another place . i nearly fell out of mine ; it was like a shelf .
and mademoiselle -- what is your name ? "
" eyre -- jane eyre . "
" aire ? bah ! i can not say it .
we stayed there nearly a week : i and sophie used to walk every day in a great green place full of trees , called the park ; and there were many children there besides me , and a pond with beautiful birds in it , that i fed with crumbs . "
" can you understand her when she runs on so fast ? " asked mrs . fairfax .
i understood her very well , for i had been accustomed to the fluent tongue of madame pierrot .
" adele , " i inquired , " with whom did you live when you were in that pretty clean town you spoke of ? "
" i lived long ago with mama ; but she is gone to the holy virgin .
shall i let you hear me sing now ? "
she had finished her breakfast , so i permitted her to give a specimen of her accomplishments .
the subject seemed strangely chosen for an infant singer ; but i suppose the point of the exhibition lay in hearing the notes of love and jealousy warbled with the lisp of childhood ; and in very bad taste that point was : at least i thought so .
this achieved , she jumped from my knee and said , " now , mademoiselle , i will repeat you some poetry . " assuming an attitude , she began , " la ligue des rats : fable de la fontaine . "
she then declaimed the little piece with an attention to punctuation and emphasis , a flexibility of voice and an appropriateness of gesture , very unusual indeed at her age , and which proved she had been carefully trained .
" was it your mama who taught you that piece ? " i asked .
now shall i dance for you ? "
" no , that will do : but after your mama went to the holy virgin , as you say , with whom did you live then ? "
" with madame frederic and her husband : she took care of me , but she is nothing related to me .
i think she is poor , for she had not so fine a house as mama .
i was not long there .
mr . rochester asked me if i would like to go and live with him in england , and i said yes ; for i knew mr . rochester before i knew madame frederic , and he was always kind to me and gave me pretty dresses and toys : but you see he has not kept his word , for he has brought me to england , and now he is gone back again himself , and i never see him . "
after breakfast , adele and i withdrew to the library , which room , it appears , mr . rochester had directed should be used as the schoolroom .
most of the books were locked up behind glass doors ; but there was one bookcase left open containing everything that could be needed in the way of elementary works , and several volumes of light literature , poetry , biography , travels , a few romances , & c.
i suppose he had considered that these were all the governess would require for her private perusal ; and , indeed , they contented me amply for the present ; compared with the scanty pickings i had now and then been able to glean at lowood , they seemed to offer an abundant harvest of entertainment and information .
mrs . fairfax was dusting some vases of fine purple spar , which stood on a sideboard .
" what a beautiful room ! " i exclaimed , as i looked round ; for i had never before seen any half so imposing .
" yes ; this is the dining - room . i have just opened the window , to let in a little air and sunshine ; for everything gets so damp in apartments that are seldom inhabited ; the drawing - room yonder feels like a vault . "
she pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window , and hung like it with a tyrian - dyed curtain , now looped up .
" in what order you keep these rooms , mrs . fairfax ! " said i.
" no dust , no canvas coverings : except that the air feels chilly , one would think they were inhabited daily . "
" is mr . rochester an exacting , fastidious sort of man ? "
" not particularly so ; but he has a gentleman 's tastes and habits , and he expects to have things managed in conformity to them . "
" do you like him ? is he generally liked ? "
" oh , yes ; the family have always been respected here .
almost all the land in this neighbourhood , as far as you can see , has belonged to the rochesters time out of mind . "
is he liked for himself ? "
" i have no cause to do otherwise than like him ; and i believe he is considered a just and liberal landlord by his tenants : but he has never lived much amongst them . "
" but has he no peculiarities ?
what , in short , is his character ? "
" in what way is he peculiar ? "
this was all the account i got from mrs . fairfax of her employer and mine .
mr . rochester was mr . rochester in her eyes ; a gentleman , a landed proprietor -- nothing more : she inquired and searched no further , and evidently wondered at my wish to gain a more definite notion of his identity .
all these relics gave to the third storey of thornfield hall the aspect of a home of the past : a shrine of memory .
" do the servants sleep in these rooms ? " i asked .
" no ; they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the back ; no one ever sleeps here : one would almost say that , if there were a ghost at thornfield hall , this would be its haunt . "
" so i think : you have no ghost , then ? "
" none that i ever heard of , " returned mrs . fairfax , smiling .
" nor any traditions of one ? no legends or ghost stories ? "
" i believe not . and yet it is said the rochesters have been rather a violent than a quiet race in their time : perhaps , though , that is the reason they rest tranquilly in their graves now . "
" yes--'after life 's fitful fever they sleep well , ' " i muttered .
" where are you going now , mrs . fairfax ? " for she was moving away .
" on to the leads ; will you come and see the view from thence ? "
i followed still , up a very narrow staircase to the attics , and thence by a ladder and through a trap - door to the roof of the hall .
i was now on a level with the crow colony , and could see into their nests .
no feature in the scene was extraordinary , but all was pleasing .
" mrs . fairfax ! " i called out : for i now heard her descending the great stairs . " did you hear that loud laugh ? who is it ? "
" some of the servants , very likely , " she answered : " perhaps grace poole . "
" did you hear it ? " i again inquired .
" yes , plainly : i often hear her : she sews in one of these rooms .
sometimes leah is with her ; they are frequently noisy together . "
the laugh was repeated in its low , syllabic tone , and terminated in an odd murmur .
" grace ! " exclaimed mrs . fairfax .
however , the event showed me i was a fool for entertaining a sense even of surprise .
the door nearest me opened , and a servant came out,--a woman of between thirty and forty ; a set , square - made figure , red - haired , and with a hard , plain face : any apparition less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely be conceived .
" too much noise , grace , " said mrs . fairfax . " remember directions ! "
grace curtseyed silently and went in .
" she is a person we have to sew and assist leah in her housemaid 's work , " continued the widow ; " not altogether unobjectionable in some points , but she does well enough .
by - the - bye , how have you got on with your new pupil this morning ? "
the conversation , thus turned on adele , continued till we reached the light and cheerful region below .
adele came running to meet us in the hall , exclaiming--
" mesdames , vous etes servies ! " adding , " j'ai bien faim , moi ! "
we found dinner ready , and waiting for us in mrs . fairfax 's room .
chapter xii
mrs . fairfax turned out to be what she appeared , a placid - tempered , kind - natured woman , of competent education and average intelligence .
i felt a conscientious solicitude for adele 's welfare and progress , and a quiet liking for her little self : just as i cherished towards mrs . fairfax a thankfulness for her kindness , and a pleasure in her society proportionate to the tranquil regard she had for me , and the moderation of her mind and character .
it is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied with tranquillity : they must have action ; and they will make it if they can not find it . millions are condemned to a stiller doom than mine , and millions are in silent revolt against their lot .
nobody knows how many rebellions besides political rebellions ferment in the masses of life which people earth .
when thus alone , i not unfrequently heard grace poole 's laugh : the same peal , the same low , slow ha ! ha ! which , when first heard , had thrilled me : i heard , too , her eccentric murmurs ; stranger than her laugh .
there were days when she was quite silent ; but there were others when i could not account for the sounds she made .
i made some attempts to draw her into conversation , but she seemed a person of few words : a monosyllabic reply usually cut short every effort of that sort .
october , november , december passed away .
the ground was hard , the air was still , my road was lonely ; i walked fast till i got warm , and then i walked slowly to enjoy and analyse the species of pleasure brooding for me in the hour and situation .
i was a mile from thornfield , in a lane noted for wild roses in summer , for nuts and blackberries in autumn , and even now possessing a few coral treasures in hips and haws , but whose best winter delight lay in its utter solitude and leafless repose .
man and horse were down ; they had slipped on the sheet of ice which glazed the causeway .
the dog came bounding back , and seeing his master in a predicament , and hearing the horse groan , barked till the evening hills echoed the sound , which was deep in proportion to his magnitude .
he snuffed round the prostrate group , and then he ran up to me ; it was all he could do,--there was no other help at hand to summon .
i obeyed him , and walked down to the traveller , by this time struggling himself free of his steed .
his efforts were so vigorous , i thought he could not be much hurt ; but i asked him the question--
" are you injured , sir ? "
i think he was swearing , but am not certain ; however , he was pronouncing some formula which prevented him from replying to me directly .
" can i do anything ? " i asked again .
" you must just stand on one side , " he answered as he rose , first to his knees , and then to his feet .
i did ; whereupon began a heaving , stamping , clattering process , accompanied by a barking and baying which removed me effectually some yards ' distance ; but i would not be driven quite away till i saw the event .
this was finally fortunate ; the horse was re - established , and the dog was silenced with a " down , pilot ! "
the traveller now , stooping , felt his foot and leg , as if trying whether they were sound ; apparently something ailed them , for he halted to the stile whence i had just risen , and sat down . i was in the mood for being useful , or at least officious , i think , for i now drew near him again .
" if you are hurt , and want help , sir , i can fetch some one either from thornfield hall or from hay . "
" thank you : i shall do : i have no broken bones,--only a sprain ; " and again he stood up and tried his foot , but the result extorted an involuntary " ugh ! "
something of daylight still lingered , and the moon was waxing bright : i could see him plainly .
i had hardly ever seen a handsome youth ; never in my life spoken to one .
" i should think you ought to be at home yourself , " said he , " if you have a home in this neighbourhood : where do you come from ? "
" yes , sir . "
" whose house is it ? "
" mr . rochester 's . "
" do you know mr . rochester ? "
" no , i have never seen him . "
" can you tell me where he is ? "
" i can not . "
" i am the governess . "
" ah , the governess ! " he repeated ; " deuce take me , if i had not forgotten ! the governess ! " and again my raiment underwent scrutiny .
in two minutes he rose from the stile : his face expressed pain when he tried to move .
" you have not an umbrella that i can use as a stick ? "
" no . "
" try to get hold of my horse 's bridle and lead him to me : you are not afraid ? "
i should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone , but when told to do it , i was disposed to obey .
the traveller waited and watched for some time , and at last he laughed .
" i see , " he said , " the mountain will never be brought to mahomet , so all you can do is to aid mahomet to go to the mountain ; i must beg of you to come here . "
i came .
" excuse me , " he continued : " necessity compels me to make you useful . "
i sought it and found it .
" thank you ; now make haste with the letter to hay , and return as fast as you can . "
i took up my muff and walked on .
the new face , too , was like a new picture introduced to the gallery of memory ; and it was dissimilar to all the others hanging there : firstly , because it was masculine ; and , secondly , because it was dark , strong , and stern .
i did not like re - entering thornfield .
i hastened to mrs . fairfax 's room ; there was a fire there too , but no candle , and no mrs . fairfax .
instead , all alone , sitting upright on the rug , and gazing with gravity at the blaze , i beheld a great black and white long - haired dog , just like the gytrash of the lane .
leah entered .
" what dog is this ? "
" he came with master . "
" with whom ? "
" with master -- mr . rochester -- he is just arrived . "
" indeed ! and is mrs . fairfax with him ? "
" yes , and miss adele ; they are in the dining - room , and john is gone for a surgeon ; for master has had an accident ; his horse fell and his ankle is sprained . "
" did the horse fall in hay lane ? "
" yes , coming down - hill ; it slipped on some ice . "
" ah ! bring me a candle will you leah ? "
leah brought it ; she entered , followed by mrs . fairfax , who repeated the news ; adding that mr . carter the surgeon was come , and was now with mr . rochester : then she hurried out to give orders about tea , and i went upstairs to take off my things .
chapter xiii
mr . rochester , it seems , by the surgeon 's orders , went to bed early that night ; nor did he rise soon next morning .
adele and i had now to vacate the library : it would be in daily requisition as a reception - room for callers .
a fire was lit in an apartment upstairs , and there i carried our books , and arranged it for the future schoolroom .
" et cela doit signifier , " said she , " qu'il y aura la dedans un cadeau pour moi , et peut - etre pour vous aussi , mademoiselle .
monsieur a parle de vous : il m'a demande le nom de ma gouvernante , et si elle n'etait pas une petite personne , assez mince et un peu pale .
j'ai dit qu'oui : car c'est vrai , n'est - ce pas , mademoiselle ? " i and my pupil dined as usual in mrs . fairfax 's parlour ; the afternoon was wild and snowy , and we passed it in the schoolroom .
at dark i allowed adele to put away books and work , and to run downstairs ; for , from the comparative silence below , and from the cessation of appeals to the door - bell , i conjectured that mr . rochester was now at liberty .
i let down the curtain and went back to the fireside .
" mr . rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take tea with him in the drawing - room this evening , " said she : " he has been so much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before . "
" when is his tea - time ? " i inquired .
here is a candle . "
" is it necessary to change my frock ? "
" yes , you had better : i always dress for the evening when mr . rochester is here . "
unused as i was to strangers , it was rather a trial to appear thus formally summoned in mr . rochester 's presence .
two wax candles stood lighted on the table , and two on the mantelpiece ; basking in the light and heat of a superb fire , lay pilot -- adele knelt near him .
i knew my traveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows ; his square forehead , made squarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair .
" here is miss eyre , sir , " said mrs . fairfax , in her quiet way .
he bowed , still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child .
i sat down quite disembarrassed .
besides , the eccentricity of the proceeding was piquant : i felt interested to see how he would go on .
he went on as a statue would , that is , he neither spoke nor moved .
" madam , i should like some tea , " was the sole rejoinder she got .
she hastened to ring the bell ; and when the tray came , she proceeded to arrange the cups , spoons , & c. , with assiduous celerity .
i and adele went to the table ; but the master did not leave his couch .
" will you hand mr . rochester 's cup ? " said mrs . fairfax to me ; " adele might perhaps spill it . "
i did as requested . as he took the cup from my hand , adele , thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favour , cried out--
" n'est - ce pas , monsieur , qu'il y a un cadeau pour mademoiselle eyre dans votre petit coffre ? "
" who talks of cadeaux ? " said he gruffly . " did you expect a present , miss eyre ?
are you fond of presents ? " and he searched my face with eyes that i saw were dark , irate , and piercing .
" i hardly know , sir ; i have little experience of them : they are generally thought pleasant things . "
" generally thought ? but what do _ you _ think ? "
" miss eyre , you are not so unsophisticated as adele : she demands a ' cadeau , ' clamorously , the moment she sees me : you beat about the bush . "
" oh , do n't fall back on over - modesty ! i have examined adele , and find you have taken great pains with her : she is not bright , she has no talents ; yet in a short time she has made much improvement . "
" sir , you have now given me my ' cadeau ; ' i am obliged to you : it is the meed teachers most covet -- praise of their pupils ' progress . "
" humph ! " said mr . rochester , and he took his tea in silence .
" you have been resident in my house three months ? "
" yes , sir . "
" and you came from-- ? " " from lowood school , in ---shire . "
" ah ! a charitable concern .
how long were you there ? "
" eight years . "
when you came on me in hay lane last night , i thought unaccountably of fairy tales , and had half a mind to demand whether you had bewitched my horse : i am not sure yet .
who are your parents ? "
" i have none . " " nor ever had , i suppose : do you remember them ? " " no . "
" i thought not . and so you were waiting for your people when you sat on that stile ? "
" for whom , sir ? "
" for the men in green : it was a proper moonlight evening for them .
i shook my head . " the men in green all forsook england a hundred years ago , " said i , speaking as seriously as he had done .
" and not even in hay lane , or the fields about it , could you find a trace of them .
i do n't think either summer or harvest , or winter moon , will ever shine on their revels more . " mrs . fairfax had dropped her knitting , and , with raised eyebrows , seemed wondering what sort of talk this was .
" well , " resumed mr . rochester , " if you disown parents , you must have some sort of kinsfolk : uncles and aunts ? "
" no ; none that i ever saw . " " and your home ? " " i have none . "
" where do your brothers and sisters live ? " " i have no brothers or sisters . "
" who recommended you to come here ? "
" i advertised , and mrs . fairfax answered my advertisement . "
miss eyre has been an invaluable companion to me , and a kind and careful teacher to adele . "
" sir ? " said mrs . fairfax .
" i have to thank her for this sprain . "
the widow looked bewildered .
" miss eyre , have you ever lived in a town ? "
" no , sir . "
" have you seen much society ? " " none but the pupils and teachers of lowood , and now the inmates of thornfield . "
" have you read much ? " " only such books as came in my way ; and they have not been numerous or very learned . "
" yes , sir . "
" and you girls probably worshipped him , as a convent full of religieuses would worship their director . "
" oh , no . "
" you are very cool ! no !
what ! a novice not worship her priest ! that sounds blasphemous . "
" i disliked mr . brocklehurst ; and i was not alone in the feeling .
" that was very false economy , " remarked mrs . fairfax , who now again caught the drift of the dialogue .
" and was that the head and front of his offending ? " demanded mr . rochester .
" about ten . " " and you stayed there eight years : you are now , then , eighteen ? "
i assented .
" arithmetic , you see , is useful ; without its aid , i should hardly have been able to guess your age .
and now what did you learn at lowood ? can you play ? "
" a little . "
" of course : that is the established answer .
go into the library -- i mean , if you please.--(excuse my tone of command ; i am used to say , ' do this , ' and it is done : i can not alter my customary habits for one new inmate.)--go , then , into the library ; take a candle with you ; leave the door open ; sit down to the piano , and play a tune . "
i departed , obeying his directions .
" enough ! " he called out in a few minutes . " you play _ a little _ , i see ; like any other english school - girl ; perhaps rather better than some , but not well . " i closed the piano and returned .
mr . rochester continued--"adele showed me some sketches this morning , which she said were yours . i do n't know whether they were entirely of your doing ; probably a master aided you ? "
" no , indeed ! " i interjected .
" ah ! that pricks pride . well , fetch me your portfolio , if you can vouch for its contents being original ; but do n't pass your word unless you are certain : i can recognise patchwork . "
" then i will say nothing , and you shall judge for yourself , sir . "
i brought the portfolio from the library .
adele and mrs . fairfax drew near to see the pictures .
" take them off to the other table , mrs . fairfax , " said he , " and look at them with adele;--you " ( glancing at me ) " resume your seat , and answer my questions .
i perceive those pictures were done by one hand : was that hand yours ? "
" yes . "
" i did them in the last two vacations i spent at lowood , when i had no other occupation . "
" where did you get your copies ? " " out of my head . "
" that head i see now on your shoulders ? "
" yes , sir . "
" has it other furniture of the same kind within ? "
" i should think it may have : i should hope -- better . " he spread the pictures before him , and again surveyed them alternately .
" were you happy when you painted these pictures ? " asked mr . rochester presently .
" that is not saying much .
your pleasures , by your own account , have been few ; but i daresay you did exist in a kind of artist 's dreamland while you blent and arranged these strange tints .
did you sit at them long each day ? "
" and you felt self - satisfied with the result of your ardent labours ? "
" far from it . i was tormented by the contrast between my idea and my handiwork : in each case i had imagined something which i was quite powerless to realise . "
" not quite : you have secured the shadow of your thought ; but no more , probably .
where did you see latmos ? for that is latmos .
take her to bed . "
mrs . fairfax folded up her knitting : i took my portfolio : we curtseyed to him , received a frigid bow in return , and so withdrew .
" you said mr . rochester was not strikingly peculiar , mrs . fairfax , " i observed , when i rejoined her in her room , after putting adele to bed .
" well , is he ? "
" i think so : he is very changeful and abrupt . "
" true : no doubt he may appear so to a stranger , but i am so accustomed to his manner , i never think of it ; and then , if he has peculiarities of temper , allowance should be made . " " why ? "
" what about ? " " family troubles , for one thing . " " but he has no family . "
" not now , but he has had -- or , at least , relatives . he lost his elder brother a few years since . "
" his _ elder _ brother ? "
" yes . the present mr . rochester has not been very long in possession of the property ; only about nine years . "
" nine years is a tolerable time . was he so very fond of his brother as to be still inconsolable for his loss ? "
the old gentleman was fond of money , and anxious to keep the family estate together .
" why should he shun it ? "
" perhaps he thinks it gloomy . " the answer was evasive .
i should have liked something clearer ; but mrs . fairfax either could not , or would not , give me more explicit information of the origin and nature of mr . rochester 's trials .
she averred they were a mystery to herself , and that what she knew was chiefly from conjecture . it was evident , indeed , that she wished me to drop the subject , which i did accordingly .
chapter xiv
for several subsequent days i saw little of mr . rochester . in the mornings he seemed much engaged with business , and , in the afternoon , gentlemen from millcote or the neighbourhood called , and sometimes stayed to dine with him .
soon after they were gone he rang the bell : a message came that i and adele were to go downstairs .
she was gratified : there it stood , a little carton , on the table when we entered the dining - room . she appeared to know it by instinct .
" ma boite ! ma boite ! " exclaimed she , running towards it .
" yes , there is your ' boite ' at last : take it into a corner , you genuine daughter of paris , and amuse yourself with disembowelling it , " said the deep and rather sarcastic voice of mr . rochester , proceeding from the depths of an immense easy - chair at the fireside .
adele seemed scarcely to need the warning -- she had already retired to a sofa with her treasure , and was busy untying the cord which secured the lid .
having removed this impediment , and lifted certain silvery envelopes of tissue paper , she merely exclaimed--
" oh ciel ! que c'est beau ! " and then remained absorbed in ecstatic contemplation .
" is miss eyre there ? " now demanded the master , half rising from his seat to look round to the door , near which i still stood .
" good evening , madam ; i sent to you for a charitable purpose .
adele , indeed , no sooner saw mrs . fairfax , than she summoned her to her sofa , and there quickly filled her lap with the porcelain , the ivory , the waxen contents of her " boite ; " pouring out , meantime , explanations and raptures in such broken english as she was mistress of .
" now i have performed the part of a good host , " pursued mr . rochester , " put my guests into the way of amusing each other , i ought to be at liberty to attend to my own pleasure .
miss eyre , draw your chair still a little farther forward : you are yet too far back ; i can not see you without disturbing my position in this comfortable chair , which i have no mind to do . "
we were , as i have said , in the dining - room : the lustre , which had been lit for dinner , filled the room with a festal breadth of light ; the large fire was all red and clear ; the purple curtains hung rich and ample before the lofty window and loftier arch ; everything was still , save the subdued chat of adele ( she dared not speak loud ) , and , filling up each pause , the beating of winter rain against the panes .
mr . rochester , as he sat in his damask - covered chair , looked different to what i had seen him look before ; not quite so stern -- much less gloomy .
there was a smile on his lips , and his eyes sparkled , whether with wine or not , i am not sure ; but i think it very probable .
" you examine me , miss eyre , " said he : " do you think me handsome ? "
i should , if i had deliberated , have replied to this question by something conventionally vague and polite ; but the answer somehow slipped from my tongue before i was aware
--"no , sir . "
beauty of little consequence , indeed !
go on : what fault do you find with me , pray ? i suppose i have all my limbs and all my features like any other man ? "
" just so : i think so : and you shall be answerable for it . criticise me : does my forehead not please you ? "
" now , ma'am , am i a fool ? "
" far from it , sir . you would , perhaps , think me rude if i inquired in return whether you are a philanthropist ? "
" hope of what , sir ? "
with this announcement he rose from his chair , and stood , leaning his arm on the marble mantelpiece : in that attitude his shape was seen plainly as well as his face ; his unusual breadth of chest , disproportionate almost to his length of limb .
instead of speaking , i smiled ; and not a very complacent or submissive smile either .
" speak , " he urged .
" what about , sir ? " " whatever you like .
i leave both the choice of subject and the manner of treating it entirely to yourself . "
" you are dumb , miss eyre . "
" stubborn ? " he said , " and annoyed . ah ! it is consistent . i put my request in an absurd , almost insolent form .
miss eyre , i beg your pardon . the fact is , once for all , i do n't wish to treat you like an inferior : that is " ( correcting himself ) , " i claim only such superiority as must result from twenty years ' difference in age and a century 's advance in experience .
he had deigned an explanation , almost an apology , and i did not feel insensible to his condescension , and would not seem so .
" i am willing to amuse you , if i can , sir -- quite willing ; but i can not introduce a topic , because how do i know what will interest you ?
ask me questions , and i will do my best to answer them . "
" do as you please , sir . "
" i do n't think , sir , you have a right to command me , merely because you are older than i , or because you have seen more of the world than i have ; your claim to superiority depends on the use you have made of your time and experience . "
leaving superiority out of the question , then , you must still agree to receive my orders now and then , without being piqued or hurt by the tone of command . will you ? "
i smiled : i thought to myself mr . rochester _ is _ peculiar -- he seems to forget that he pays me 30 pounds per annum for receiving his orders .
" the smile is very well , " said he , catching instantly the passing expression ; " but speak too . "
" i was thinking , sir , that very few masters would trouble themselves to inquire whether or not their paid subordinates were piqued and hurt by their orders . "
" paid subordinates ! what ! you are my paid subordinate , are you ?
" and will you consent to dispense with a great many conventional forms and phrases , without thinking that the omission arises from insolence ? "
not three in three thousand raw school - girl - governesses would have answered me as you have just done .
but i do n't mean to flatter you : if you are cast in a different mould to the majority , it is no merit of yours : nature did it .
" and so may you , " i thought .
my eye met his as the idea crossed my mind : he seemed to read the glance , answering as if its import had been spoken as well as imagined--
i started , or rather ( for like other defaulters , i like to lay half the blame on ill fortune and adverse circumstances ) was thrust on to a wrong tack at the age of one - and - twenty , and have never recovered the right course since : but i might have been very different ; i might have been as good as you -- wiser -- almost as stainless . i envy you your peace of mind , your clean conscience , your unpolluted memory .
" how was your memory when you were eighteen , sir ? "
" all right then ; limpid , salubrious : no gush of bilge water had turned it to fetid puddle .
" how do you know?--how can you guess all this , sir ? "
" i know it well ; therefore i proceed almost as freely as if i were writing my thoughts in a diary .
dread remorse when you are tempted to err , miss eyre ; remorse is the poison of life . "
" repentance is said to be its cure , sir . "
besides , since happiness is irrevocably denied me , i have a right to get pleasure out of life : and i _ will _ get it , cost what it may . "
" then you will degenerate still more , sir . "
" possibly : yet why should i , if i can get sweet , fresh pleasure ? and i may get it as sweet and fresh as the wild honey the bee gathers on the moor . "
" it will sting -- it will taste bitter , sir . "
" how do you know?--you never tried it .
how very serious -- how very solemn you look : and you are as ignorant of the matter as this cameo head " ( taking one from the mantelpiece ) .
here it comes again !
it is no devil , i assure you ; or if it be , it has put on the robes of an angel of light . i think i must admit so fair a guest when it asks entrance to my heart . "
" distrust it , sir ; it is not a true angel . "
" once more , how do you know ?
" i judged by your countenance , sir , which was troubled when you said the suggestion had returned upon you . i feel sure it will work you more misery if you listen to it . "
" not at all -- it bears the most gracious message in the world : for the rest , you are not my conscience - keeper , so do n't make yourself uneasy .
" and better ? "
you seem to doubt me ; i do n't doubt myself : i know what my aim is , what my motives are ; and at this moment i pass a law , unalterable as that of the medes and persians , that both are right . "
" they can not be , sir , if they require a new statute to legalise them . "
" they are , miss eyre , though they absolutely require a new statute : unheard - of combinations of circumstances demand unheard - of rules . "
" sententious sage ! so it is : but i swear by my household gods not to abuse it . "
" you are human and fallible . " " i am : so are you -- what then ? "
" the human and fallible should not arrogate a power with which the divine and perfect alone can be safely intrusted . "
" ' let it be right'--the very words : you have pronounced them . "
" where are you going ? " " to put adele to bed : it is past her bedtime . "
" you are afraid of me , because i talk like a sphynx . "
" your language is enigmatical , sir : but though i am bewildered , i am certainly not afraid . "
" you _ are _ afraid -- your self - love dreads a blunder . "
" in that sense i do feel apprehensive -- i have no wish to talk nonsense . "
" if you did , it would be in such a grave , quiet manner , i should mistake it for sense .
do you never laugh , miss eyre ?
do n't trouble yourself to answer -- i see you laugh rarely ; but you can laugh very merrily : believe me , you are not naturally austere , any more than i am naturally vicious .
i see at intervals the glance of a curious sort of bird through the close - set bars of a cage : a vivid , restless , resolute captive is there ; were it but free , it would soar cloud - high . you are still bent on going ? "
" it has struck nine , sir . "
" never mind,--wait a minute : adele is not ready to go to bed yet .
however , my tenderest feelings are about to receive a shock : such is my presentiment ; stay now , to see whether it will be realised . "
ere long , adele 's little foot was heard tripping across the hall .
she entered , transformed as her guardian had predicted . a dress of rose - coloured satin , very short , and as full in the skirt as it could be gathered , replaced the brown frock she had previously worn ; a wreath of rosebuds circled her forehead ; her feet were dressed in silk stockings and small white satin sandals .
tenez , je crois que je vais danser ! "
and spreading out her dress , she chasseed across the room till , having reached mr . rochester , she wheeled lightly round before him on tip - toe , then dropped on one knee at his feet , exclaiming--
" monsieur , je vous remercie mille fois de votre bonte ; " then rising , she added , " c'est comme cela que maman faisait , n'est - ce pas , monsieur ? "
" pre - cise - ly ! " was the answer ; " and , ' comme cela , ' she charmed my english gold out of my british breeches ' pocket .
i have been green , too , miss eyre,--ay , grass green : not a more vernal tint freshens you now than once freshened me .
good - night . "
chapter xv
this passion celine had professed to return with even superior ardour .
he thought himself her idol , ugly as he was : he believed , as he said , that she preferred his " _ taille d'athlete _ " to the elegance of the apollo belvidere .
" and , miss eyre , so much was i flattered by this preference of the gallic sylph for her british gnome , that i installed her in an hotel ; gave her a complete establishment of servants , a carriage , cashmeres , diamonds , dentelles , & c.
no,--i exaggerate ; i never thought there was any consecrating virtue about her : it was rather a sort of pastille perfume she had left ; a scent of musk and amber , than an odour of sanctity .
i was just beginning to stifle with the fumes of conservatory flowers and sprinkled essences , when i bethought myself to open the window and step out on to the balcony .
" i liked bonbons too in those days , miss eyre , and i was _ croquant_--(overlook the barbarism)--_croquant _ chocolate comfits , and smoking alternately , watching meantime the equipages that rolled along the fashionable streets towards the neighbouring opera - house , when in an elegant close carriage drawn by a beautiful pair of english horses , and distinctly seen in the brilliant city - night , i recognised the ' voiture ' i had given celine .
" you never felt jealousy , did you , miss eyre ?
of course not : i need not ask you ; because you never felt love .
but i tell you -- and you may mark my words -- you will come some day to a craggy pass in the channel , where the whole of life 's stream will be broken up into whirl and tumult , foam and noise : either you will be dashed to atoms on crag points , or lifted up and borne on by some master - wave into a calmer current -- as i am now .
" i like this day ; i like that sky of steel ; i like the sternness and stillness of the world under this frost . i like thornfield , its antiquity , its retirement , its old crow - trees and thorn - trees , its grey facade , and lines of dark windows reflecting that metal welkin : and yet how long have i abhorred the very thought of it , shunned it like a great plague - house ? how i do still abhor-- "
wild was the wrestle which should be paramount ; but another feeling rose and triumphed : something hard and cynical : self - willed and resolute : it settled his passion and petrified his countenance : he went on--
" ' i will like it , ' said i ; ' i dare like it ; ' and " ( he subjoined moodily ) " i will keep my word ; i will break obstacles to happiness , to goodness -- yes , goodness .
adele here ran before him with her shuttlecock .
" away ! " he cried harshly ; " keep at a distance , child ; or go in to sophie ! "
i almost expected a rebuff for this hardly well - timed question , but , on the contrary , waking out of his scowling abstraction , he turned his eyes towards me , and the shade seemed to clear off his brow .
" oh , i had forgotten celine ! well , to resume .
after this digression he proceeded--
my eye was quickly at the aperture . celine 's chamber - maid entered , lit a lamp , left it on the table , and withdrew .
" they began to talk ; their conversation eased me completely : frivolous , mercenary , heartless , and senseless , it was rather calculated to weary than enrage a listener .
adele here came running up again .
" monsieur , john has just been to say that your agent has called and wishes to see you . "
some years after i had broken with the mother , she abandoned her child , and ran away to italy with a musician or singer .
" no : adele is not answerable for either her mother 's faults or yours : i have a regard for her ; and now that i know she is , in a sense , parentless -- forsaken by her mother and disowned by you , sir -- i shall cling closer to her than before .
" oh , that is the light in which you view it !
well , i must go in now ; and you too : it darkens . "
but i stayed out a few minutes longer with adele and pilot -- ran a race with her , and played a game of battledore and shuttlecock .
still she had her merits ; and i was disposed to appreciate all that was good in her to the utmost .
it was a pity : if she could but have been proved to resemble him , he would have thought more of her .
it was not till after i had withdrawn to my own chamber for the night , that i steadily reviewed the tale mr . rochester had told me .
his deportment had now for some weeks been more uniform towards me than at the first .
the ease of his manner freed me from painful restraint : the friendly frankness , as correct as cordial , with which he treated me , drew me to him .
he was proud , sardonic , harsh to inferiority of every description : in my secret soul i knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others .
" why not ? " i asked myself . " what alienates him from the house ?
will he leave it again soon ?
mrs . fairfax said he seldom stayed here longer than a fortnight at a time ; and he has now been resident eight weeks .
if he does go , the change will be doleful . suppose he should be absent spring , summer , and autumn : how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem ! "
i hardly know whether i had slept or not after this musing ; at any rate , i started wide awake on hearing a vague murmur , peculiar and lugubrious , which sounded , i thought , just above me .
i wished i had kept my candle burning : the night was drearily dark ; my spirits were depressed . i rose and sat up in bed , listening . the sound was hushed .
i tried again to sleep ; but my heart beat anxiously : my inward tranquillity was broken .
the clock , far down in the hall , struck two .
just then it seemed my chamber - door was touched ; as if fingers had swept the panels in groping a way along the dark gallery outside . i said , " who is there ? " nothing answered .
the idea calmed me somewhat : i lay down .
this was a demoniac laugh -- low , suppressed , and deep -- uttered , as it seemed , at the very keyhole of my chamber door .
the head of my bed was near the door , and i thought at first the goblin - laugher stood at my bedside -- or rather , crouched by my pillow : but i rose , looked round , and could see nothing ; while , as i still gazed , the unnatural sound was reiterated : and i knew it came from behind the panels .
my first impulse was to rise and fasten the bolt ; my next , again to cry out ,
" who is there ? "
something gurgled and moaned . ere long , steps retreated up the gallery towards the third - storey staircase : a door had lately been made to shut in that staircase ; i heard it open and close , and all was still .
" was that grace poole ? and is she possessed with a devil ? " thought i. impossible now to remain longer by myself : i must go to mrs . fairfax .
tongues of flame darted round the bed : the curtains were on fire . in the midst of blaze and vapour , mr . rochester lay stretched motionless , in deep sleep .
" is there a flood ? " he cried .
" in the name of all the elves in christendom , is that jane eyre ? " he demanded .
" what have you done with me , witch , sorceress ?
who is in the room besides you ?
have you plotted to drown me ? "
" shall i call mrs . fairfax ? " i asked .
" mrs . fairfax ? no ; what the deuce would you call her for ?
what can she do ? let her sleep unmolested . "
" then i will fetch leah , and wake john and his wife . "
" i hope it is he , " thought i , " and not something worse . " he re - entered , pale and very gloomy .
" i have found it all out , " said he , setting his candle down on the washstand ; " it is as i thought . "
" how , sir ? "
" i forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened your chamber door . "
" no , sir , only the candlestick on the ground . "
" but you heard an odd laugh ? you have heard that laugh before , i should think , or something like it ? "
" yes , sir : there is a woman who sews here , called grace poole,--she laughs in that way . she is a singular person . "
" just so . grace poole -- you have guessed it . she is , as you say , singular -- very .
it is near four:--in two hours the servants will be up . "
" good - night , then , sir , " said i , departing .
he seemed surprised -- very inconsistently so , as he had just told me to go .
" what ! " he exclaimed , " are you quitting me already , and in that way ? "
" you said i might go , sir . "
" but not without taking leave ; not without a word or two of acknowledgment and good - will : not , in short , in that brief , dry fashion .
he held out his hand ; i gave him mine : he took it first in one , them in both his own .
" you have saved my life : i have a pleasure in owing you so immense a debt . i can not say more .
nothing else that has being would have been tolerable to me in the character of creditor for such an obligation : but you : it is different;--i feel your benefits no burden , jane . "
he paused ; gazed at me : words almost visible trembled on his lips,--but his voice was checked .
" good - night again , sir . there is no debt , benefit , burden , obligation , in the case . "
people talk of natural sympathies ; i have heard of good genii : there are grains of truth in the wildest fable .
my cherished preserver , goodnight ! "
strange energy was in his voice , strange fire in his look .
" i am glad i happened to be awake , " i said : and then i was going .
" what ! you _ will _ go ? "
" i am cold , sir . "
i bethought myself of an expedient . " i think i hear mrs . fairfax move , sir , " said i.
" well , leave me : " he relaxed his fingers , and i was gone .
i regained my couch , but never thought of sleep .
chapter xvi
i both wished and feared to see mr . rochester on the day which followed this sleepless night : i wanted to hear his voice again , yet feared to meet his eye .
but the morning passed just as usual : nothing happened to interrupt the quiet course of adele 's studies ; only soon after breakfast , i heard some bustle in the neighbourhood of mr . rochester 's chamber , mrs . fairfax 's voice , and leah 's , and the cook's -- that is , john 's wife -- and even john 's own gruff tones .
there she sat , staid and taciturn - looking , as usual , in her brown stuff gown , her check apron , white handkerchief , and cap .
" i will put her to some test , " thought i : " such absolute impenetrability is past comprehension . "
" good morning , grace , " i said .
" has anything happened here ? i thought i heard the servants all talking together a while ago . "
" a strange affair ! " i said , in a low voice : then , looking at her fixedly
--"did mr . rochester wake nobody ? did no one hear him move ? "
" the servants sleep so far off , you know , miss , they would not be likely to hear .
mrs . fairfax 's room and yours are the nearest to master 's ; but mrs . fairfax said she heard nothing : when people get elderly , they often sleep heavy . "
" it is hardly likely master would laugh , i should think , miss , when he was in such danger : you must have been dreaming . "
" i was not dreaming , " i said , with some warmth , for her brazen coolness provoked me .
" you did not think of opening your door and looking out into the gallery ? " she further asked .
she appeared to be cross - questioning me , attempting to draw from me information unawares .
" then you are not in the habit of bolting your door every night before you get into bed ? "
" fiend ! she wants to know my habits , that she may lay her plans accordingly ! "
and here she closed her harangue : a long one for her , and uttered with the demureness of a quakeress .
i still stood absolutely dumfoundered at what appeared to me her miraculous self - possession and most inscrutable hypocrisy , when the cook entered .
" mrs . poole , " said she , addressing grace , " the servants ' dinner will soon be ready : will you come down ? "
" no ; just put my pint of porter and bit of pudding on a tray , and i 'll carry it upstairs . "
" you 'll have some meat ? "
" just a morsel , and a taste of cheese , that 's all . "
" and the sago ? " " never mind it at present : i shall be coming down before teatime : i 'll make it myself . " the cook here turned to me , saying that mrs . fairfax was waiting for me : so i departed .
he had almost as much as declared his conviction of her criminality last night : what mysterious cause withheld him from accusing her ? why had he enjoined me , too , to secrecy ?
had grace been young and handsome , i should have been tempted to think that tenderer feelings than prudence or fear influenced mr . rochester in her behalf ; but , hard - favoured and matronly as she was , the idea could not be admitted .
mr . rochester is an amateur of the decided and eccentric : grace is eccentric at least .
yet , " suggested the secret voice which talks to us in our own hearts , " you are not beautiful either , and perhaps mr . rochester approves you : at any rate , you have often felt as if he did ; and last night -- remember his words ; remember his look ; remember his voice ! "
" vos doigts tremblent comme la feuille , et vos joues sont rouges : mais , rouges comme des cerises ! "
i hastened to drive from my mind the hateful notion i had been conceiving respecting grace poole ; it disgusted me . i compared myself with her , and found we were different .
bessie leaven had said i was quite a lady ; and she spoke truth -- i was a lady .
and now i looked much better than i did when bessie saw me ; i had more colour and more flesh , more life , more vivacity , because i had brighter hopes and keener enjoyments .
still it was not late ; he often sent for me at seven and eight o'clock , and it was yet but six . surely i should not be wholly disappointed to - night , when i had so many things to say to him !
" you must want your tea , " said the good lady , as i joined her ; " you ate so little at dinner .
i am afraid , " she continued , " you are not well to- day : you look flushed and feverish . "
" oh , quite well ! i never felt better . "
" it is fair to - night , " said she , as she looked through the panes , " though not starlight ; mr . rochester has , on the whole , had a favourable day for his journey . " " journey!--is mr . rochester gone anywhere ? i did not know he was out . "
" oh , he set off the moment he had breakfasted ! he is gone to the leas , mr . eshton 's place , ten miles on the other side millcote .
i believe there is quite a party assembled there ; lord ingram , sir george lynn , colonel dent , and others . "
" do you expect him back to - night ? "
" are there ladies at the leas ? "
" there are mrs . eshton and her three daughters -- very elegant young ladies indeed ; and there are the honourable blanche and mary ingram , most beautiful women , i suppose : indeed i have seen blanche , six or seven years since , when she was a girl of eighteen . she came here to a christmas ball and party mr . rochester gave .
you should have seen the dining - room that day -- how richly it was decorated , how brilliantly lit up !
i should think there were fifty ladies and gentlemen present -- all of the first county families ; and miss ingram was considered the belle of the evening . "
" you saw her , you say , mrs . fairfax : what was she like ? "
" and what was she like ? "
" tall , fine bust , sloping shoulders ; long , graceful neck : olive complexion , dark and clear ; noble features ; eyes rather like mr . rochester 's : large and black , and as brilliant as her jewels .
and then she had such a fine head of hair ; raven - black and so becomingly arranged : a crown of thick plaits behind , and in front the longest , the glossiest curls i ever saw .
" she was greatly admired , of course ? "
" mr . rochester ? i was not aware he could sing . "
" oh ! he has a fine bass voice , and an excellent taste for music . "
" and miss ingram : what sort of a voice had she ? "
" a very rich and powerful one : she sang delightfully ; it was a treat to listen to her;--and she played afterwards .
i am no judge of music , but mr . rochester is ; and i heard him say her execution was remarkably good . "
" and this beautiful and accomplished lady , she is not yet married ? "
" but i wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman has taken a fancy to her : mr . rochester , for instance . he is rich , is he not ? "
" oh ! yes . but you see there is a considerable difference in age : mr . rochester is nearly forty ; she is but twenty - five . "
" true : yet i should scarcely fancy mr . rochester would entertain an idea of the sort .
" no : i am too thirsty to eat . will you let me have another cup ? "
i was about again to revert to the probability of a union between mr . rochester and the beautiful blanche ; but adele came in , and the conversation was turned into another channel .
that a greater fool than jane eyre had never breathed the breath of life ; that a more fantastic idiot had never surfeited herself on sweet lies , and swallowed poison as if it were nectar .
poor stupid dupe!--could not even self - interest make you wiser ?
" listen , then , jane eyre , to your sentence : to - morrow , place the glass before you , and draw in chalk your own picture , faithfully , without softening one defect ; omit no harsh line , smooth away no displeasing irregularity ; write under it , ' portrait of a governess , disconnected , poor , and plain . '
no snivel!--no sentiment!--no regret ! i will endure only sense and resolution .
recall the august yet harmonious lineaments , the grecian neck and bust ; let the round and dazzling arm be visible , and the delicate hand ; omit neither diamond ring nor gold bracelet ; portray faithfully the attire , aerial lace and glistening satin , graceful scarf and golden rose ; call it ' blanche , an accomplished lady of rank . '
" i 'll do it , " i resolved : and having framed this determination , i grew calm , and fell asleep .
i derived benefit from the task : it had kept my head and hands employed , and had given force and fixedness to the new impressions i wished to stamp indelibly on my heart .
chapter xvii
a week passed , and no news arrived of mr . rochester : ten days , and still he did not come .
when i heard this , i was beginning to feel a strange chill and failing at the heart .
mr . rochester had been absent upwards of a fortnight , when the post brought mrs . fairfax a letter . " it is from the master , " said she , as she looked at the direction . " now i suppose we shall know whether we are to expect his return or not . "
" well , i sometimes think we are too quiet ; but we run a chance of being busy enough now : for a little while at least , " said mrs . fairfax , still holding the note before her spectacles .
" mr . rochester is not likely to return soon , i suppose ? "
and mrs . fairfax swallowed her breakfast and hastened away to commence operations . the three days were , as she had foretold , busy enough . i had thought all the rooms at thornfield beautifully clean and well arranged ; but it appears i was mistaken .
from school duties she was exonerated : mrs . fairfax had pressed me into her service , and i was all day in the storeroom , helping ( or hindering ) her and the cook ; learning to make custards and cheese - cakes and french pastry , to truss game and garnish desert - dishes .
the strangest thing of all was , that not a soul in the house , except me , noticed her habits , or seemed to marvel at them : no one discussed her position or employment ; no one pitied her solitude or isolation .
i once , indeed , overheard part of a dialogue between leah and one of the charwomen , of which grace formed the subject .
leah had been saying something i had not caught , and the charwoman remarked-- " she gets good wages , i guess ? "
" she is a good hand , i daresay , " said the charwoman .
" ah!--she understands what she has to do,--nobody better , " rejoined leah significantly ; " and it is not every one could fill her shoes -- not for all the money she gets . "
" that it is not ! " was the reply . " i wonder whether the master-- "
the charwoman was going on ; but here leah turned and perceived me , and she instantly gave her companion a nudge .
" does n't she know ? " i heard the woman whisper .
thursday came : all work had been completed the previous evening ; carpets were laid down , bed - hangings festooned , radiant white counterpanes spread , toilet tables arranged , furniture rubbed , flowers piled in vases : both chambers and saloons looked as fresh and bright as hands could make them .
afternoon arrived : mrs . fairfax assumed her best black satin gown , her gloves , and her gold watch ; for it was her part to receive the company,--to conduct the ladies to their rooms , & c.
adele , too , would be dressed : though i thought she had little chance of being introduced to the party that day at least .
however , to please her , i allowed sophie to apparel her in one of her short , full muslin frocks . for myself , i had no need to make any change ; i should not be called upon to quit my sanctum of the schoolroom ; for a sanctum it was now become to me,--"a very pleasant refuge in time of trouble . "
she went to the window .
" here he is ! " said she . " well , john " ( leaning out ) , " any news ? "
" they 're coming , ma'am , " was the answer . " they 'll be here in ten minutes . "
adele flew to the window . i followed , taking care to stand on one side , so that , screened by the curtain , i could see without being seen .
" miss ingram ! " exclaimed mrs . fairfax , and away she hurried to her post below .
the cavalcade , following the sweep of the drive , quickly turned the angle of the house , and i lost sight of it .
" some natural tears she shed " on being told this ; but as i began to look very grave , she consented at last to wipe them .
" elles changent de toilettes , " said adele ; who , listening attentively , had followed every movement ; and she sighed .
" chez maman , " said she , " quand il y avait du monde , je le suivais partout , au salon et a leurs chambres ; souvent je regardais les femmes de chambre coiffer et habiller les dames , et c'etait si amusant : comme cela on apprend . "
" do n't you feel hungry , adele ? "
" mais oui , mademoiselle : voila cinq ou six heures que nous n'avons pas mange . "
" well now , while the ladies are in their rooms , i will venture down and get you something to eat . "
and issuing from my asylum with precaution , i sought a back - stairs which conducted directly to the kitchen .
threading this chaos , i at last reached the larder ; there i took possession of a cold chicken , a roll of bread , some tarts , a plate or two and a knife and fork : with this booty i made a hasty retreat .
" what beautiful ladies ! " cried she in english . " oh , i wish i might go to them ! do you think mr . rochester will send for us by - and - bye , after dinner ? "
" no , indeed , i do n't ; mr . rochester has something else to think about . never mind the ladies to - night ; perhaps you will see them to - morrow : here is your dinner . "
she was really hungry , so the chicken and tarts served to divert her attention for a time .
the dessert was not carried out till after nine and at ten footmen were still running to and fro with trays and coffee- cups .
i allowed adele to sit up much later than usual ; for she declared she could not possibly go to sleep while the doors kept opening and shutting below , and people bustling about .
besides , she added , a message might possibly come from mr . rochester when she was undressed ; " et alors quel dommage ! "
i told her stories as long as she would listen to them ; and then for a change i took her out into the gallery . the hall lamp was now lit , and it amused her to look over the balustrade and watch the servants passing backwards and forwards .
the solo over , a duet followed , and then a glee : a joyous conversational murmur filled up the intervals .
it was near one before the gentlemen and ladies sought their chambers .
the next day was as fine as its predecessor : it was devoted by the party to an excursion to some site in the neighbourhood .
i pointed out this circumstance to mrs . fairfax , who was standing at the window with me--
" yes , i daresay : no doubt he admires her . "
" you will see her this evening , " answered mrs . fairfax .
" i happened to remark to mr . rochester how much adele wished to be introduced to the ladies , and he said : ' oh ! let her come into the drawing - room after dinner ; and request miss eyre to accompany her . ' "
" yes ; he said that from mere politeness : i need not go , i am sure , " i answered .
shall you be there , mrs . fairfax ? "
" no ; i pleaded off , and he admitted my plea .
" will these people remain long , do you think ? "
" perhaps two or three weeks , certainly not more .
it was with some trepidation that i perceived the hour approach when i was to repair with my charge to the drawing - room .
this i quickly was : my best dress ( the silver - grey one , purchased for miss temple 's wedding , and never worn since ) was soon put on ; my hair was soon smoothed ; my sole ornament , the pearl brooch , soon assumed .
adele , who appeared to be still under the influence of a most solemnising impression , sat down , without a word , on the footstool i pointed out to her . i retired to a window - seat , and taking a book from a table near , endeavoured to read .
adele brought her stool to my feet ; ere long she touched my knee . " what is it , adele ? "
" est - ce que je ne puis pas prendrie une seule de ces fleurs magnifiques , mademoiselle ? seulement pour completer ma toilette . "
i rose and curtseyed to them : one or two bent their heads in return , the others only stared at me .
they dispersed about the room , reminding me , by the lightness and buoyancy of their movements , of a flock of white plumy birds . some of them threw themselves in half - reclining positions on the sofas and ottomans : some bent over the tables and examined the flowers and books : the rest gathered in a group round the fire : all talked in a low but clear tone which seemed habitual to them .
i knew their names afterwards , and may as well mention them now .
the second , louisa , was taller and more elegant in figure ; with a very pretty face , of that order the french term _ minois chiffone _ : both sisters were fair as lilies .
but the three most distinguished -- partly , perhaps , because the tallest figures of the band -- were the dowager lady ingram and her daughters , blanche and mary . they were all three of the loftiest stature of women .
the dowager might be between forty and fifty : her shape was still fine ; her hair ( by candle - light at least ) still black ; her teeth , too , were still apparently perfect .
a crimson velvet robe , and a shawl turban of some gold - wrought indian fabric , invested her ( i suppose she thought ) with a truly imperial dignity .
blanche and mary were of equal stature,--straight and tall as poplars . mary was too slim for her height , but blanche was moulded like a dian .
the sisters were both attired in spotless white . and did i now think miss ingram such a choice as mr . rochester would be likely to make ?
lady lynn had remarked , " it is mr . rochester 's ward , i suppose -- the little french girl he was speaking of . "
mrs . dent had kindly taken her hand , and given her a kiss .
amy and louisa eshton had cried out simultaneously--"what a love of a child ! "
at last coffee is brought in , and the gentlemen are summoned .
henry and frederick lynn are very dashing sparks indeed ; and colonel dent is a fine soldierly man . mr . eshton , the magistrate of the district , is gentleman - like : his hair is quite white , his eyebrows and whiskers still dark , which gives him something of the appearance of a " pere noble de theatre . "
lord ingram , like his sisters , is very tall ; like them , also , he is handsome ; but he shares mary 's apathetic and listless look : he seems to have more length of limb than vivacity of blood or vigour of brain .
what had occurred since , calculated to change his and my relative positions ?
most true is it that " beauty is in the eye of the gazer . "
i compared him with his guests . what was the gallant grace of the lynns , the languid elegance of lord ingram,--even the military distinction of colonel dent , contrasted with his look of native pith and genuine power ?
i saw mr . rochester smile:--his stern features softened ; his eye grew both brilliant and gentle , its ray both searching and sweet .
he was talking , at the moment , to louisa and amy eshton . i wondered to see them receive with calm that look which seemed to me so penetrating : i expected their eyes to fall , their colour to rise under it ; yet i was glad when i found they were in no sense moved .
i must , then , repeat continually that we are for ever sundered:--and yet , while i breathe and think , i must love him . "
coffee is handed .
the ladies , since the gentlemen entered , have become lively as larks ; conversation waxes brisk and merry .
colonel dent and mr . eshton argue on politics ; their wives listen .
the two proud dowagers , lady lynn and lady ingram , confabulate together . sir george -- whom , by - the - bye , i have forgotten to describe,--a very big , and very fresh - looking country gentleman , stands before their sofa , coffee- cup in hand , and occasionally puts in a word . mr . frederick lynn has taken a seat beside mary ingram , and is showing her the engravings of a splendid volume : she looks , smiles now and then , but apparently says little .
the tall and phlegmatic lord ingram leans with folded arms on the chair - back of the little and lively amy eshton ; she glances up at him , and chatters like a wren : she likes him better than she does mr . rochester .
henry lynn has taken possession of an ottoman at the feet of louisa : adele shares it with him : he is trying to talk french with her , and louisa laughs at his blunders . with whom will blanche ingram pair ? she is standing alone at the table , bending gracefully over an album . she seems waiting to be sought ; but she will not wait too long : she herself selects a mate .
mr . rochester , having quitted the eshtons , stands on the hearth as solitary as she stands by the table : she confronts him , taking her station on the opposite side of the mantelpiece .
" mr . rochester , i thought you were not fond of children ? "
" nor am i. "
" i could not afford it : schools are so dear . "
" why , i suppose you have a governess for her : i saw a person with her just now -- is she gone ?
oh , no ! there she is still , behind the window- curtain .
you pay her , of course ; i should think it quite as expensive,--more so ; for you have them both to keep in addition . "
" i have not considered the subject , " said he indifferently , looking straight before him . " no , you men never do consider economy and common sense .
" did you speak , my own ? "
" my dearest , do n't mention governesses ; the word makes me nervous .
i have suffered a martyrdom from their incompetency and caprice .
i thank heaven i have now done with them ! "
" tant pis ! " said her ladyship , " i hope it may do her good ! "
" what are they , madam ? " inquired mr . rochester aloud .
" i will tell you in your private ear , " replied she , wagging her turban three times with portentous significancy .
" but my curiosity will be past its appetite ; it craves food now . "
" ask blanche ; she is nearer you than i. "
" oh , do n't refer him to me , mama !
i have just one word to say of the whole tribe ; they are a nuisance .
not that i ever suffered much from them ; i took care to turn the tables . what tricks theodore and i used to play on our miss wilsons , and mrs . greys , and madame jouberts ! mary was always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit .
the best fun was with madame joubert : miss wilson was a poor sickly thing , lachrymose and low- spirited , not worth the trouble of vanquishing , in short ; and mrs . grey was coarse and insensible ; no blow took effect on her .
theodore , do you remember those merry days ? "
" we did ; and , tedo , you know , i helped you in prosecuting ( or persecuting ) your tutor , whey - faced mr . vining -- the parson in the pip , as we used to call him .
" certainly , my best . and i was quite right : depend on that : there are a thousand reasons why liaisons between governesses and tutors should never be tolerated a moment in any well - regulated house ; firstly-- "
" oh , gracious , mama ! spare us the enumeration ! _ au reste _ , we all know them : danger of bad example to innocence of childhood ; distractions and consequent neglect of duty on the part of the attached -- mutual alliance and reliance ; confidence thence resulting -- insolence accompanying -- mutiny and general blow - up .
am i right , baroness ingram , of ingram park ? " " my lily - flower , you are right now , as always . "
" no , never : we might do what we pleased ; ransack her desk and her workbox , and turn her drawers inside out ; and she was so good - natured , she would give us anything we asked for . "
mr . rochester , do you second my motion ? "
" madam , i support you on this point , as on every other . "
" then on me be the onus of bringing it forward .
signior eduardo , are you in voice to - night ? " " donna bianca , if you command it , i will be . "
miss ingram , who had now seated herself with proud grace at the piano , spreading out her snowy robes in queenly amplitude , commenced a brilliant prelude ; talking meantime .
" whenever i marry , " she continued after a pause which none interrupted , " i am resolved my husband shall not be a rival , but a foil to me .
i will suffer no competitor near the throne ; i shall exact an undivided homage : his devotions shall not be shared between me and the shape he sees in his mirror .
mr . rochester , now sing , and i will play for you . "
" i am all obedience , " was the response .
" here then is a corsair - song . know that i doat on corsairs ; and for that reason , sing it _ con spirito _ . "
" commands from miss ingram 's lips would put spirit into a mug of milk and water . "
" that is offering a premium on incapacity : i shall now endeavour to fail . "
" gardez - vous en bien ! if you err wilfully , i shall devise a proportionate punishment . "
" miss ingram ought to be clement , for she has it in her power to inflict a chastisement beyond mortal endurance . "
" now is my time to slip away , " thought i : but the tones that then severed the air arrested me .
" how do you do ? " he asked . " i am very well , sir . "
" why did you not come and speak to me in the room ? "
i thought i might have retorted the question on him who put it : but i would not take that freedom .
" what have you been doing during my absence ? "
" nothing particular ; teaching adele as usual . "
" and getting a good deal paler than you were -- as i saw at first sight .
what is the matter ? "
" nothing at all , sir . "
" did you take any cold that night you half drowned me ? "
" not the least . "
" return to the drawing - room : you are deserting too early . "
" i am tired , sir . " he looked at me for a minute .
" and a little depressed , " he said . " what about ? tell me . "
" nothing -- nothing , sir . i am not depressed . "
now go , and send sophie for adele .
good - night , my-- " he stopped , bit his lip , and abruptly left me .
chapter xviii
merry days were these at thornfield hall ; and busy days too : how different from the first three months of stillness , monotony , and solitude i had passed beneath its roof !
all sad feelings seemed now driven from the house , all gloomy associations forgotten : there was life everywhere , movement all day long . you could not now traverse the gallery , once so hushed , nor enter the front chambers , once so tenantless , without encountering a smart lady's - maid or a dandy valet .
the servants were called in , the dining - room tables wheeled away , the lights otherwise disposed , the chairs placed in a semicircle opposite the arch .
while mr . rochester and the other gentlemen directed these alterations , the ladies were running up and down stairs ringing for their maids .
meantime , mr . rochester had again summoned the ladies round him , and was selecting certain of their number to be of his party .
" miss ingram is mine , of course , " said he : afterwards he named the two misses eshton , and mrs . dent .
one of the gentlemen , mr . eshton , observing me , seemed to propose that i should be asked to join them ; but lady ingram instantly negatived the notion .
" no , " i heard her say : " she looks too stupid for any game of the sort . " ere long a bell tinkled , and the curtain drew up .
a ceremony followed , in dumb show , in which it was easy to recognise the pantomime of a marriage . at its termination , colonel dent and his party consulted in whispers for two minutes , then the colonel called out--
" bride ! " mr . rochester bowed , and the curtain fell .
presently advanced into view miss ingram . she , too , was attired in oriental fashion : a crimson scarf tied sash - like round the waist : an embroidered handkerchief knotted about her temples ; her beautifully - moulded arms bare , one of them upraised in the act of supporting a pitcher , poised gracefully on her head .
both her cast of form and feature , her complexion and her general air , suggested the idea of some israelitish princess of the patriarchal days ; and such was doubtless the character she intended to represent .
from the bosom of his robe he then produced a casket , opened it and showed magnificent bracelets and earrings ; she acted astonishment and admiration ; kneeling , he laid the treasure at her feet ; incredulity and delight were expressed by her looks and gestures ; the stranger fastened the bracelets on her arms and the rings in her ears .
" is all the soot washed from my face ? " he asked , turning it towards her .
" you would like a hero of the road then ? "
" well , whatever i am , remember you are my wife ; we were married an hour since , in the presence of all these witnesses . "
she giggled , and her colour rose .
" now , dent , " continued mr . rochester , " it is your turn . "
and as the other party withdrew , he and his band took the vacated seats . miss ingram placed herself at her leader 's right hand ; the other diviners filled the chairs on each side of him and her .
i could not unlove him , because i felt sure he would soon marry this very lady -- because i read daily in her a proud security in his intentions respecting her -- because i witnessed hourly in him a style of courtship which , if careless and choosing rather to be sought than to seek , was yet , in its very carelessness , captivating , and in its very pride , irresistible .
yes ; the future bridegroom , mr . rochester himself , exercised over his intended a ceaseless surveillance ; and it was from this sagacity -- this guardedness of his -- this perfect , clear consciousness of his fair one 's defects -- this obvious absence of passion in his sentiments towards her , that my ever- torturing pain arose .
arrows that continually glanced off from mr . rochester 's breast and fell harmless at his feet , might , i knew , if shot by a surer hand , have quivered keen in his proud heart -- have called love into his stern eye , and softness into his sardonic face ; or , better still , without weapons a silent conquest might have been won .
i asked myself . " surely she can not truly like him , or not like him with true affection !
i do not think she will manage it ; and yet it might be managed ; and his wife might , i verily believe , be the very happiest woman the sun shines on . "
sir george lynn , colonel dent , and mr . eshton discussed politics , or county affairs , or justice business . lord ingram flirted with amy eshton ; louisa played and sang to and with one of the messrs . lynn ; and mary ingram listened languidly to the gallant speeches of the other .
the want of his animating influence appeared to be peculiarly felt one day that he had been summoned to millcote on business , and was not likely to return till late .
the room and the house were silent : only now and then the merriment of the billiard - players was heard from above .
it was verging on dusk , and the clock had already given warning of the hour to dress for dinner , when little adele , who knelt by me in the drawing - room window - seat , suddenly exclaimed--
" voila , monsieur rochester , qui revient ! "
i turned , and miss ingram darted forwards from her sofa : the others , too , looked up from their several occupations ; for at the same time a crunching of wheels and a splashing tramp of horse - hoofs became audible on the wet gravel . a post - chaise was approaching .
the post - chaise stopped ; the driver rang the door - bell , and a gentleman alighted attired in travelling garb ; but it was not mr . rochester ; it was a tall , fashionable - looking man , a stranger .
" how provoking ! " exclaimed miss ingram : " you tiresome monkey ! " ( apostrophising adele ) , " who perched you up in the window to give false intelligence ? " and she cast on me an angry glance , as if i were in fault .
on closer examination , you detected something in his face that displeased , or rather that failed to please . his features were regular , but too relaxed : his eye was large and well cut , but the life looking out of it was a tame , vacant life -- at least so i thought . the sound of the dressing - bell dispersed the party .
for a handsome and not an unamiable - looking man , he repelled me exceedingly : there was no power in that smooth - skinned face of a full oval shape : no firmness in that aquiline nose and small cherry mouth ; there was no thought on the low , even forehead ; no command in that blank , brown eye .
he had spoken of mr . rochester as an old friend .
a curious friendship theirs must have been : a pointed illustration , indeed , of the old adage that " extremes meet . "
two or three of the gentlemen sat near him , and i caught at times scraps of their conversation across the room .
and then , to my great relief , mr . henry lynn summoned them to the other side of the room , to settle some point about the deferred excursion to hay common .
i knew mr . rochester had been a traveller : mrs . fairfax had said so ; but i thought the continent of europe had bounded his wanderings ; till now i had never heard a hint given of visits to more distant shores .
i was pondering these things , when an incident , and a somewhat unexpected one , broke the thread of my musings .
the footman who brought the coal , in going out , stopped near mr . eshton 's chair , and said something to him in a low voice , of which i heard only the words , " old woman,"--"quite troublesome . "
" tell her she shall be put in the stocks if she does not take herself off , " replied the magistrate .
" no -- stop ! " interrupted colonel dent . " do n't send her away , eshton ; we might turn the thing to account ; better consult the ladies . "
" what does she want ? " asked mrs . eshton .
" ' to tell the gentry their fortunes , ' she says , ma'am ; and she swears she must and will do it . "
" a shockingly ugly old creature , miss ; almost as black as a crock . "
" my dear boys , what are you thinking about ? " exclaimed mrs . lynn .
" i can not possibly countenance any such inconsistent proceeding , " chimed in the dowager ingram .
" my darling blanche ! recollect-- "
" i do -- i recollect all you can suggest ; and i must have my will -- quick , sam ! "
" yes -- yes -- yes ! " cried all the juveniles , both ladies and gentlemen . " let her come -- it will be excellent sport ! "
the footman still lingered . " she looks such a rough one , " said he .
" go ! " ejaculated miss ingram , and the man went .
excitement instantly seized the whole party : a running fire of raillery and jests was proceeding when sam returned .
" she wo n't come now , " said he . " she says it 's not her mission to appear before the ' vulgar herd ' ( them 's her words ) .
" you see now , my queenly blanche , " began lady ingram , " she encroaches . be advised , my angel girl -- and-- "
" show her into the library , of course , " cut in the " angel girl . "
" it is not my mission to listen to her before the vulgar herd either : i mean to have her all to myself .
is there a fire in the library ? "
" yes , ma'am -- but she looks such a tinkler . "
" cease that chatter , blockhead ! and do my bidding . "
again sam vanished ; and mystery , animation , expectation rose to full flow once more .
" she 's ready now , " said the footman , as he reappeared . " she wishes to know who will be her first visitor . "
sam went and returned .
" she says , sir , that she 'll have no gentlemen ; they need not trouble themselves to come near her ; nor , " he added , with difficulty suppressing a titter , " any ladies either , except the young , and single . "
" by jove , she has taste ! " exclaimed henry lynn .
lady ingram thought it " le cas " to wring her hands : which she did accordingly . miss mary declared she felt , for her part , she never dared venture . amy and louisa eshton tittered under their breath , and looked a little frightened .
would she laugh ? would she take it as a joke ?
" well , blanche ? " said lord ingram .
" what did she say , sister ? " asked mary .
" what did you think ?
how do you feel?--is she a real fortune - teller ? " demanded the misses eshton .
" now , now , good people , " returned miss ingram , " do n't press upon me .
miss ingram took a book , leant back in her chair , and so declined further conversation .
i watched her for nearly half - an - hour : during all that time she never turned a page , and her face grew momently darker , more dissatisfied , and more sourly expressive of disappointment .
{ during all that time she never turned a page : p184.jpg } meantime , mary ingram , amy and louisa eshton , declared they dared not go alone ; and yet they all wished to go .
" she told us such things ! she knows all about us ! " and they sank breathless into the various seats the gentlemen hastened to bring them .
in the midst of the tumult , and while my eyes and ears were fully engaged in the scene before me , i heard a hem close at my elbow : i turned , and saw sam .
i thought it must be you : there is no one else for it .
what shall i tell her ? "
" if you like , miss , " said sam , " i 'll wait in the hall for you ; and if she frightens you , just call and i 'll come in . "
" no , sam , return to the kitchen : i am not in the least afraid . "
nor was i ; but i was a good deal interested and excited .
chapter xix
" well , and you want your fortune told ? " she said , in a voice as decided as her glance , as harsh as her features .
" it 's like your impudence to say so : i expected it of you ; i heard it in your step as you crossed the threshold . "
" did you ? you 've a quick ear . "
" i have ; and a quick eye and a quick brain . "
" you need them all in your trade . "
" i do ; especially when i 've customers like you to deal with . why do n't you tremble ? "
" i 'm not cold . "
" why do n't you turn pale ? "
" i am not sick . "
" why do n't you consult my art ? "
" i 'm not silly . "
" prove it , " i rejoined .
she again put her short black pipe to her lips , and renewed her smoking with vigour .
" you might say all that to almost any one who you knew lived as a solitary dependent in a great house . "
" i might say it to almost any one : but would it be true of almost any one ? "
" in my circumstances . "
" yes ; just so , in _ your _ circumstances : but find me another precisely placed as you are . "
" it would be easy to find you thousands . "
" you could scarcely find me one .
if you knew it , you are peculiarly situated : very near happiness ; yes , within reach of it . the materials are all prepared ; there only wants a movement to combine them . chance laid them somewhat apart ; let them be once approached and bliss results . "
i never could guess a riddle in my life . "
" if you wish me to speak more plainly , show me your palm . "
" and i must cross it with silver , i suppose ? "
" to be sure . "
" it is too fine , " said she . " i can make nothing of such a hand as that ; almost without lines : besides , what is in a palm ? destiny is not written there . "
" i believe you , " said i.
" no , " she continued , " it is in the face : on the forehead , about the eyes , in the lines of the mouth . kneel , and lift up your head . "
" then you have some secret hope to buoy you up and please you with whispers of the future ? "
" a mean nutriment for the spirit to exist on : and sitting in that window- seat ( you see i know your habits ) -- " " you have learned them from the servants . "
" ah ! you think yourself sharp .
well , perhaps i have : to speak truth , i have an acquaintance with one of them , mrs . poole-- "
i started to my feet when i heard the name .
" you have -- have you ? " thought i ; " there is diablerie in the business after all , then ! "
but , as i was saying : sitting in that window - seat , do you think of nothing but your future school ?
is there not one face you study ? one figure whose movements you follow with at least curiosity ? "
" i like to observe all the faces and all the figures . "
" but do you never single one from the rest -- or it may be , two ? "
" i do frequently ; when the gestures or looks of a pair seem telling a tale : it amuses me to watch them . "
" what tale do you like best to hear ? "
" oh , i have not much choice ! they generally run on the same theme -- courtship ; and promise to end in the same catastrophe -- marriage . "
" and do you like that monotonous theme ? "
" positively , i do n't care about it : it is nothing to me . "
" nothing to you ?
when a lady , young and full of life and health , charming with beauty and endowed with the gifts of rank and fortune , sits and smiles in the eyes of a gentleman you-- "
" i what ? "
" you know -- and perhaps think well of . "
you have not exchanged a syllable with one of them ?
will you say that of the master of the house ! "
" he is not at home . "
" no ; but i can scarcely see what mr . rochester has to do with the theme you had introduced . "
" i was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of gentlemen ; and of late so many smiles have been shed into mr . rochester 's eyes that they overflow like two cups filled above the brim : have you never remarked that ? "
" mr . rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his guests . "
" grateful !
i can not remember detecting gratitude in his face . "
" detecting ! you have analysed , then . and what did you detect , if not gratitude ? "
i said nothing .
" you have seen love : have you not?--and , looking forward , you have seen him married , and beheld his bride happy ? "
" humph ! not exactly . your witch 's skill is rather at fault sometimes . "
" what the devil have you seen , then ? "
" never mind : i came here to inquire , not to confess . is it known that mr . rochester is to be married ? "
" yes ; and to the beautiful miss ingram . "
" shortly ? "
" but , mother , i did not come to hear mr . rochester 's fortune : i came to hear my own ; and you have told me nothing of it . "
" your fortune is yet doubtful : when i examined your face , one trait contradicted another .
chance has meted you a measure of happiness : that i know . i knew it before i came here this evening . she has laid it carefully on one side for you . i saw her do it .
it depends on yourself to stretch out your hand , and take it up : but whether you will do so , is the problem i study .
kneel again on the rug . "
" do n't keep me long ; the fire scorches me . "
" the flame flickers in the eye ; the eye shines like dew ; it looks soft and full of feeling ; it smiles at my jargon : it is susceptible ; impression follows impression through its clear sphere ; where it ceases to smile , it is sad ; an unconscious lassitude weighs on the lid : that signifies melancholy resulting from loneliness . it turns from me ; it will not suffer further scrutiny ; it seems to deny , by a mocking glance , the truth of the discoveries i have already made,--to disown the charge both of sensibility and chagrin : its pride and reserve only confirm me in my opinion .
" as to the mouth , it delights at times in laughter ; it is disposed to impart all that the brain conceives ; though i daresay it would be silent on much the heart experiences . mobile and flexible , it was never intended to be compressed in the eternal silence of solitude : it is a mouth which should speak much and smile often , and have human affection for its interlocutor .
that feature too is propitious .
strong wind , earthquake - shock , and fire may pass by : but i shall follow the guiding of that still small voice which interprets the dictates of conscience . '
i wish to foster , not to blight -- to earn gratitude , not to wring tears of blood -- no , nor of brine : my harvest must be in smiles , in endearments , in sweet -- that will do .
rise , miss eyre : leave me ; the play is played out ' . "
the old woman 's voice had changed : her accent , her gesture , and all were familiar to me as my own face in a glass -- as the speech of my own tongue . i got up , but did not go .
" well , jane , do you know me ? " asked the familiar voice .
" only take off the red cloak , sir , and then-- "
" but the string is in a knot -- help me . "
" break it , sir . "
" there , then--'off , ye lendings ! ' " and mr . rochester stepped out of his disguise .
" now , sir , what a strange idea ! "
" but well carried out , eh ? do n't you think so ? "
" but not with you ? "
" you did not act the character of a gipsy with me . "
" what character did i act ? my own ? "
" do you forgive me , jane ? "
" oh , you have been very correct -- very careful , very sensible . "
" well , " said he , " what are you musing about ?
what does that grave smile signify ? "
" no ; stay a moment ; and tell me what the people in the drawing - room yonder are doing . "
" discussing the gipsy , i daresay . "
" sit down!--let me hear what they said about me . "
" a stranger!--no ; who can it be ?
i expected no one ; is he gone ? "
" no ; he said he had known you long , and that he could take the liberty of installing himself here till you returned . " " the devil he did !
did he give his name ? "
" mason!--the west indies ! " he said , in the tone one might fancy a speaking automaton to enounce its single words ; " mason!--the west indies ! " he reiterated ; and he went over the syllables three times , growing , in the intervals of speaking , whiter than ashes : he hardly seemed to know what he was doing .
" do you feel ill , sir ? " i inquired .
" oh , lean on me , sir . "
" jane , you offered me your shoulder once before ; let me have it now . "
" yes , sir , yes ; and my arm . "
" my little friend ! " said he , " i wish i were in a quiet island with only you ; and trouble , and danger , and hideous recollections removed from me . "
" can i help you , sir?--i'd give my life to serve you . "
" jane , if aid is wanted , i 'll seek it at your hands ; i promise you that . "
" thank you , sir . tell me what to do,--i'll try , at least , to do it . "
every one seemed in high glee ; laughter and conversation were general and animated .
i filled a wine - glass ( i saw miss ingram watch me frowningly as i did so : she thought i was taking a liberty , i daresay ) , and i returned to the library .
mr . rochester 's extreme pallor had disappeared , and he looked once more firm and stern . he took the glass from my hand .
" here is to your health , ministrant spirit ! " he said . he swallowed the contents and returned it to me .
" what are they doing , jane ? "
" laughing and talking , sir . "
" they do n't look grave and mysterious , as if they had heard something strange ? "
" not at all : they are full of jests and gaiety . "
" and mason ? "
" he was laughing too . "
" if all these people came in a body and spat at me , what would you do , jane ? "
" turn them out of the room , sir , if i could . "
" i rather think not , sir : i should have more pleasure in staying with you . "
" to comfort me ? "
" yes , sir , to comfort you , as well as i could . "
" and if they laid you under a ban for adhering to me ? "
" i , probably , should know nothing about their ban ; and if i did , i should care nothing about it . "
" then , you could dare censure for my sake ? "
" i could dare it for the sake of any friend who deserved my adherence ; as you , i am sure , do . "
i did his behest .
at a late hour , after i had been in bed some time , i heard the visitors repair to their chambers : i distinguished mr . rochester 's voice , and heard him say , " this way , mason ; this is your room . "
he spoke cheerfully : the gay tones set my heart at ease . i was soon asleep .
chapter xx
awaking in the dead of night , i opened my eyes on her disk -- silver - white and crystal clear . it was beautiful , but too solemn ; i half rose , and stretched my arm to draw the curtain .
good god ! what a cry ! the night -- its silence -- its rest , was rent in twain by a savage , a sharp , a shrilly sound that ran from end to end of thornfield hall .
my pulse stopped : my heart stood still ; my stretched arm was paralysed .
it came out of the third storey ; for it passed overhead .
" help ! help ! help ! " three times rapidly .
but for the moonlight they would have been in complete darkness . they ran to and fro ; they crowded together : some sobbed , some stumbled : the confusion was inextricable .
" be composed , all of you : i 'm coming . "
" but do n't pull me down or strangle me , " he replied : for the misses eshton were clinging about him now ; and the two dowagers , in vast white wrappers , were bearing down on him like ships in full sail .
" all 's right!--all 's right ! " he cried . " it 's a mere rehearsal of much ado about nothing . ladies , keep off , or i shall wax dangerous . "
and dangerous he looked : his black eyes darted sparks . calming himself by an effort , he added--
" a servant has had the nightmare ; that is all . she 's an excitable , nervous person : she construed her dream into an apparition , or something of that sort , no doubt ; and has taken a fit with fright .
now , then , i must see you all back into your rooms ; for , till the house is settled , she can not be looked after .
not , however , to go to bed : on the contrary , i began and dressed myself carefully .
no : stillness returned : each murmur and movement ceased gradually , and in about an hour thornfield hall was again as hushed as a desert . it seemed that sleep and night had resumed their empire .
" am i wanted ? " i asked .
" are you up ? " asked the voice i expected to hear , viz . , my master 's .
" yes . "
" come out , then , quietly . "
i obeyed .
mr . rochester stood in the gallery holding a light .
" i want you , " he said : " come this way : take your time , and make no noise . "
my slippers were thin : i could walk the matted floor as softly as a cat .
" yes , sir . "
" have you any salts -- volatile salts ? "
" go back and fetch both . "
i returned , sought the sponge on the washstand , the salts in my drawer , and once more retraced my steps .
" you do n't turn sick at the sight of blood ? "
" i think i shall not : i have never been tried yet . "
i felt a thrill while i answered him ; but no coldness , and no faintness .
" just give me your hand , " he said : " it will not do to risk a fainting fit . "
i put my fingers into his .
" warm and steady , " was his remark : he turned the key and opened the door .
mr . rochester held the candle over him ; i recognised in his pale and seemingly lifeless face -- the stranger , mason : i saw too that his linen on one side , and one arm , was almost soaked in blood .
he took the sponge , dipped it in , and moistened the corpse - like face ; he asked for my smelling - bottle , and applied it to the nostrils .
" is there immediate danger ? " murmured mr . mason .
" pooh ! no -- a mere scratch . do n't be so overcome , man : bear up !
i 'll fetch a surgeon for you now , myself : you 'll be able to be removed by morning , i hope . jane , " he continued .
" sir ? "
mr . rochester put the now bloody sponge into my hand , and i proceeded to use it as he had done .
he watched me a second , then saying , " remember!--no conversation , " he left the room .
i experienced a strange feeling as the key grated in the lock , and the sound of his retreating step ceased to be heard .
here then i was in the third storey , fastened into one of its mystic cells ; night around me ; a pale and bloody spectacle under my eyes and hands ; a murderess hardly separated from me by a single door : yes -- that was appalling -- the rest i could bear ; but i shuddered at the thought of grace poole bursting out upon me .
and this man i bent over -- this commonplace , quiet stranger -- how had he become involved in the web of horror ? and why had the fury flown at him ?
what made him seek this quarter of the house at an untimely season , when he should have been asleep in bed ?
i had heard mr . rochester assign him an apartment below -- what brought him here !
and why , now , was he so tame under the violence or treachery done him ?
why did he so quietly submit to the concealment mr . rochester enforced ? why _ did _ mr . rochester enforce this concealment ?
his guest had been outraged , his own life on a former occasion had been hideously plotted against ; and both attempts he smothered in secrecy and sank in oblivion !
why had the mere name of this unresisting individual -- whom his word now sufficed to control like a child -- fallen on him , a few hours since , as a thunderbolt might fall on an oak ? oh !
i could not forget his look and his paleness when he whispered : " jane , i have got a blow -- i have got a blow , jane . "
" when will he come ? when will he come ? " i cried inwardly , as the night lingered and lingered -- as my bleeding patient drooped , moaned , sickened : and neither day nor aid arrived .
i had , again and again , held the water to mason 's white lips ; again and again offered him the stimulating salts : my efforts seemed ineffectual : either bodily or mental suffering , or loss of blood , or all three combined , were fast prostrating his strength . he moaned so , and looked so weak , wild , and lost , i feared he was dying ; and i might not even speak to him .
the candle , wasted at last , went out ; as it expired , i perceived streaks of grey light edging the window curtains : dawn was then approaching .
mr . rochester entered , and with him the surgeon he had been to fetch .
" now , carter , be on the alert , " he said to this last : " i give you but half - an - hour for dressing the wound , fastening the bandages , getting the patient downstairs and all . "
" but is he fit to move , sir ? "
come , set to work . "
" now , my good fellow , how are you ? " he asked .
" she 's done for me , i fear , " was the faint reply .
carter , assure him there 's no danger . "
" she bit me , " he murmured . " she worried me like a tigress , when rochester got the knife from her . "
" you should not have yielded : you should have grappled with her at once , " said mr . rochester .
" but under such circumstances , what could one do ? " returned mason .
" i thought i could have done some good . "
carter -- hurry!--hurry ! the sun will soon rise , and i must have him off . "
" directly , sir ; the shoulder is just bandaged .
" she sucked the blood : she said she 'd drain my heart , " said mason .
" come , be silent , richard , and never mind her gibberish : do n't repeat it . "
" i wish i could forget it , " was the answer .
" you will when you are out of the country : when you get back to spanish town , you may think of her as dead and buried -- or rather , you need not think of her at all . "
" impossible to forget this night ! "
" it is not impossible : have some energy , man .
you thought you were as dead as a herring two hours since , and you are all alive and talking now .
i retired as directed .
" was anybody stirring below when you went down , jane ? " inquired mr . rochester presently .
" no , sir ; all was very still . "
i have striven long to avoid exposure , and i should not like it to come at last .
here , carter , help him on with his waist - coat .
in your room?--jane , run down to mr . mason 's room,--the one next mine,--and fetch a cloak you will see there . "
again i ran , and again returned , bearing an immense mantle lined and edged with fur .
" now , i 've another errand for you , " said my untiring master ; " you must away to my room again .
i flew thither and back , bringing the desired vessels .
" that 's well ! now , doctor , i shall take the liberty of administering a dose myself , on my own responsibility .
i got this cordial at rome , of an italian charlatan -- a fellow you would have kicked , carter . it is not a thing to be used indiscriminately , but it is good upon occasion : as now , for instance .
jane , a little water . "
" drink , richard : it will give you the heart you lack , for an hour or so . "
" but will it hurt me?--is it inflammatory ? "
" drink ! drink ! drink ! "
mr . mason obeyed , because it was evidently useless to resist .
he was dressed now : he still looked pale , but he was no longer gory and sullied .
mr . rochester let him sit three minutes after he had swallowed the liquid ; he then took his arm--
" now i am sure you can get on your feet , " he said--"try . "
the patient rose .
" carter , take him under the other shoulder .
be of good cheer , richard ; step out -- that 's it ! "
" i do feel better , " remarked mr . mason .
" i am sure you do .
now , jane , trip on before us away to the backstairs ; unbolt the side - passage door , and tell the driver of the post - chaise you will see in the yard -- or just outside , for i told him not to drive his rattling wheels over the pavement -- to be ready ; we are coming : and , jane , if any one is about , come to the foot of the stairs and hem . "
the gentlemen now appeared .
mason , supported by mr . rochester and the surgeon , seemed to walk with tolerable ease : they assisted him into the chaise ; carter followed .
richard , how is it with you ? "
" the fresh air revives me , fairfax . "
" leave the window open on his side , carter ; there is no wind -- good - bye , dick . "
" fairfax-- "
" well what is it ? "
" let her be taken care of ; let her be treated as tenderly as may be : let her-- " he stopped and burst into tears .
" yet would to god there was an end of all this ! " added mr . rochester , as he closed and barred the heavy yard - gates .
this done , he moved with slow step and abstracted air towards a door in the wall bordering the orchard . i , supposing he had done with me , prepared to return to the house ; again , however , i heard him call " jane ! "
" it seems to me a splendid mansion , sir . "
now _ here _ " ( he pointed to the leafy enclosure we had entered ) " all is real , sweet , and pure . "
" jane , will you have a flower ? "
" do you like this sunrise , jane ?
that sky with its high and light clouds which are sure to melt away as the day waxes warm -- this placid and balmly atmosphere ? "
" i do , very much . "
" you have passed a strange night , jane . "
" yes , sir . "
" and it has made you look pale -- were you afraid when i left you alone with mason ? "
" i was afraid of some one coming out of the inner room . "
" will grace poole live here still , sir ? "
" oh yes ! do n't trouble your head about her -- put the thing out of your thoughts . "
" yet it seems to me your life is hardly secure while she stays . "
" never fear -- i will take care of myself . "
" is the danger you apprehended last night gone by now , sir ? "
" i can not vouch for that till mason is out of england : nor even then . to live , for me , jane , is to stand on a crater - crust which may crack and spue fire any day . " " but mr . mason seems a man easily led .
your influence , sir , is evidently potent with him : he will never set you at defiance or wilfully injure you . "
" tell him to be cautious , sir : let him know what you fear , and show him how to avert the danger . "
he laughed sardonically , hastily took my hand , and as hastily threw it from him .
but i can not give him orders in this case : i can not say ' beware of harming me , richard ; ' for it is imperative that i should keep him ignorant that harm to me is possible .
now you look puzzled ; and i will puzzle you further .
you are my little friend , are you not ? "
" i like to serve you , sir , and to obey you in all that is right . " " precisely : i see you do .
" if you have no more to fear from mr . mason than you have from me , sir , you are very safe . "
" god grant it may be so !
here , jane , is an arbour ; sit down . "
the arbour was an arch in the wall , lined with ivy ; it contained a rustic seat .
mr . rochester took it , leaving room , however , for me : but i stood before him .
" sit , " he said ; " the bench is long enough for two .
you do n't hesitate to take a place at my side , do you ? is that wrong , jane ? "
i answered him by assuming it : to refuse would , i felt , have been unwise .
" no , sir ; i am content . "
mind , i do n't say a _ crime _ ; i am not speaking of shedding of blood or any other guilty act , which might make the perpetrator amenable to the law : my word is _ error _ .
to attain this end , are you justified in overleaping an obstacle of custom -- a mere conventional impediment which neither your conscience sanctifies nor your judgment approves ? "
he paused for an answer :
and what was i to say ?
oh , for some good spirit to suggest a judicious and satisfactory response !
vain aspiration ! the west wind whispered in the ivy round me ; but no gentle ariel borrowed its breath as a medium of speech : the birds sang in the tree - tops ; but their song , however sweet , was inarticulate .
again mr . rochester propounded his query :
" is the wandering and sinful , but now rest - seeking and repentant , man justified in daring the world 's opinion , in order to attach to him for ever this gentle , gracious , genial stranger , thereby securing his own peace of mind and regeneration of life ? "
" but the instrument -- the instrument !
god , who does the work , ordains the instrument .
at last i looked up at the tardy speaker : he was looking eagerly at me .
" jane , jane , " said he , stopping before me , " you are quite pale with your vigils : do n't you curse me for disturbing your rest ? "
" curse you ? no , sir . "
" shake hands in confirmation of the word .
what cold fingers ! they were warmer last night when i touched them at the door of the mysterious chamber .
jane , when will you watch with me again ? "
" whenever i can be useful , sir . "
" yes , sir . "
" she 's a rare one , is she not , jane ? "
" yes , sir . "
" a strapper -- a real strapper , jane : big , brown , and buxom ; with hair just such as the ladies of carthage must have had .
bless me ! there 's dent and lynn in the stables !
" mason got the start of you all this morning ; he was gone before sunrise : i rose at four to see him off . "
chapter xxi
presentiments are strange things ! and so are sympathies ; and so are signs ; and the three combined make one mystery to which humanity has not yet found the key . i never laughed at presentiments in my life , because i have had strange ones of my own . sympathies , i believe , exist ( for instance , between far - distant , long - absent , wholly estranged relatives asserting , notwithstanding their alienation , the unity of the source to which each traces his origin ) whose workings baffle mortal comprehension . and signs , for aught we know , may be but the sympathies of nature with man .
" i daresay you hardly remember me , miss , " he said , rising as i entered ; " but my name is leaven : i lived coachman with mrs . reed when you were at gateshead , eight or nine years since , and i live there still . "
" oh , robert ! how do you do ?
i remember you very well : you used to give me a ride sometimes on miss georgiana 's bay pony .
and how is bessie ? you are married to bessie ? "
" and are the family well at the house , robert ? "
" i hope no one is dead , " i said , glancing at his black dress .
" mr . john ? "
" yes . "
" and how does his mother bear it ? "
" i heard from bessie he was not doing well . "
i was silent : the things were frightful .
the information about mr . john 's death and the manner of it came too suddenly : it brought on a stroke .
" i think so too , miss . bessie said she was sure you would not refuse : but i suppose you will have to ask leave before you can get off ? "
" if you please , sir , i want leave of absence for a week or two . "
" what to do?--where to go ? "
" to see a sick lady who has sent for me . "
" what sick lady?--where does she live ? "
" at gateshead ; in ---shire . "
" -shire ? that is a hundred miles off !
" her name is reed , sir -- mrs . reed . "
" reed of gateshead ?
there was a reed of gateshead , a magistrate . "
" it is his widow , sir . "
" and what have you to do with her ? how do you know her ? "
" mr . reed was my uncle -- my mother 's brother . "
" the deuce he was ! you never told me that before : you always said you had no relations . "
" why ? "
" because i was poor , and burdensome , and she disliked me . "
" but reed left children?--you must have cousins ?
sir george lynn was talking of a reed of gateshead yesterday , who , he said , was one of the veriest rascals on town ; and ingram was mentioning a georgiana reed of the same place , who was much admired for her beauty a season or two ago in london . "
" john reed is dead , too , sir : he ruined himself and half - ruined his family , and is supposed to have committed suicide . the news so shocked his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack . "
" and what good can you do her ? nonsense , jane !
i would never think of running a hundred miles to see an old lady who will , perhaps , be dead before you reach her : besides , you say she cast you off . "
" yes , sir , but that is long ago ; and when her circumstances were very different : i could not be easy to neglect her wishes now . "
" how long will you stay ? "
" as short a time as possible , sir . "
" promise me only to stay a week-- "
" i had better not pass my word : i might be obliged to break it . "
" oh , no ! i shall certainly return if all be well . "
" and who goes with you ? you do n't travel a hundred miles alone . "
" no , sir , she has sent her coachman . "
" a person to be trusted ? "
" yes , sir , he has lived ten years in the family . "
mr . rochester meditated . " when do you wish to go ? "
" early to - morrow morning , sir . "
how much have you in the world , jane ? " he asked , smiling .
i drew out my purse ; a meagre thing it was . " five shillings , sir . "
he took the purse , poured the hoard into his palm , and chuckled over it as if its scantiness amused him .
soon he produced his pocket - book : " here , " said he , offering me a note ; it was fifty pounds , and he owed me but fifteen . i told him i had no change .
" i do n't want change ; you know that . take your wages . "
i declined accepting more than was my due .
" yes , sir , but now you owe me five . "
" come back for it , then ; i am your banker for forty pounds . "
" matter of business ? i am curious to hear it . "
" you have as good as informed me , sir , that you are going shortly to be married ? "
" yes ; what then ? "
" in that case , sir , adele ought to go to school : i am sure you will perceive the necessity of it . "
" to get her out of my bride 's way , who might otherwise walk over her rather too emphatically ?
" i hope not , sir ; but i must seek another situation somewhere . "
" and old madam reed , or the misses , her daughters , will be solicited by you to seek a place , i suppose ? "
" no , sir ; i am not on such terms with my relatives as would justify me in asking favours of them -- but i shall advertise . "
i wish i had only offered you a sovereign instead of ten pounds .
give me back nine pounds , jane ; i 've a use for it . "
" and so have i , sir , " i returned , putting my hands and my purse behind me . " i could not spare the money on any account . "
" little niggard ! " said he , " refusing me a pecuniary request !
give me five pounds , jane . "
" not five shillings , sir ; nor five pence . "
" jane ! "
" sir ? "
" promise me one thing . "
" i shall be glad so to do , sir , if you , in your turn , will promise that i and adele shall be both safe out of the house before your bride enters it . "
" very well ! very well ! i 'll pledge my word on it .
" yes , sir ; early . "
" shall you come down to the drawing - room after dinner ? "
" no , sir , i must prepare for the journey . "
" then you and i must bid good - bye for a little while ? "
" i suppose so , sir . "
" and how do people perform that ceremony of parting , jane ?
teach me ; i 'm not quite up to it . "
" they say , farewell , or any other form they prefer . "
" then say it . "
" farewell , mr . rochester , for the present . "
" what must i say ? "
" the same , if you like , sir . "
" farewell , miss eyre , for the present ; is that all ? "
" yes ? "
" it seems stingy , to my notions , and dry , and unfriendly . i should like something else : a little addition to the rite . if one shook hands , for instance ; but no -- that would not content me either .
so you 'll do no more than say farewell , jane ? "
" it is enough , sir : as much good - will may be conveyed in one hearty word as in many . "
" very likely ; but it is blank and cool--'farewell . ' "
i reached the lodge at gateshead about five o'clock in the afternoon of the first of may : i stepped in there before going up to the hall . it was very clean and neat : the ornamental windows were hung with little white curtains ; the floor was spotless ; the grate and fire - irons were burnished bright , and the fire burnt clear . bessie sat on the hearth , nursing her last - born , and robert and his sister played quietly in a corner .
" bless you!--i knew you would come ! " exclaimed mrs . leaven , as i entered .
how is mrs . reed?--alive still , i hope . "
" yes , she is alive ; and more sensible and collected than she was .
" has she mentioned me lately ? "
robert here entered , and bessie laid her sleeping child in the cradle and went to welcome him : afterwards she insisted on my taking off my bonnet and having some tea ; for she said i looked pale and tired .
in such conversation an hour was soon gone : bessie restored to me my bonnet , & c. , and , accompanied by her , i quitted the lodge for the hall .
in another moment i was within that apartment .
this i felt sure was eliza , though i could trace little resemblance to her former self in that elongated and colourless visage .
the other was as certainly georgiana : but not the georgiana i remembered -- the slim and fairy - like girl of eleven .
both ladies , as i advanced , rose to welcome me , and both addressed me by the name of " miss eyre . "
eliza 's greeting was delivered in a short , abrupt voice , without a smile ; and then she sat down again , fixed her eyes on the fire , and seemed to forget me .
" mrs . reed ? ah ! mama , you mean ; she is extremely poorly : i doubt if you can see her to - night . "
" if , " said i , " you would just step upstairs and tell her i am come , i should be much obliged to you . "
georgiana almost started , and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide .
" i know she had a particular wish to see me , " i added , " and i would not defer attending to her desire longer than is absolutely necessary . "
" mama dislikes being disturbed in an evening , " remarked eliza .
i went , and having found bessie and despatched her on my errand , i proceeded to take further measures .
so i addressed the housekeeper ; asked her to show me a room , told her i should probably be a visitor here for a week or two , had my trunk conveyed to my chamber , and followed it thither myself : i met bessie on the landing .
" is this jane eyre ? " she said .
again she regarded me so icily , i felt at once that her opinion of me -- her feeling towards me -- was unchanged and unchangeable .
" you sent for me , " i said , " and i am here ; and it is my intention to stay till i see how you get on . "
" oh , of course !
you have seen my daughters ? "
" yes . "
" sit up ! " said she ; " do n't annoy me with holding the clothes fast .
are you jane eyre ? "
what did they do with her at lowood ? the fever broke out there , and many of the pupils died . she , however , did not die : but i said she did -- i wish she had died ! "
" a strange wish , mrs . reed ; why do you hate her so ? "
" perhaps you had , miss : but she often talks in this way towards night -- in the morning she is calmer . "
i rose .
what is to be done ?
how is the money to be had ? "
bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative draught : she succeeded with difficulty .
soon after , mrs . reed grew more composed , and sank into a dozing state . i then left her .
meantime , i got on as well as i could with georgiana and eliza .
now for the eyes : i had left them to the last , because they required the most careful working .
i drew them large ; i shaped them well : the eyelashes i traced long and sombre ; the irids lustrous and large .
there , i had a friend 's face under my gaze ; and what did it signify that those young ladies turned their backs on me ?
" is that a portrait of some one you know ? " asked eliza , who had approached me unnoticed .
i responded that it was merely a fancy head , and hurried it beneath the other sheets .
of course , i lied : it was , in fact , a very faithful representation of mr . rochester . but what was that to her , or to any one but myself ?
georgiana also advanced to look . the other drawings pleased her much , but she called that " an ugly man . "
they both seemed surprised at my skill .
the communications were renewed from day to day : they always ran on the same theme -- herself , her loves , and woes . it was strange she never once adverted either to her mother 's illness , or her brother 's death , or the present gloomy state of the family prospects . her mind seemed wholly taken up with reminiscences of past gaiety , and aspirations after dissipations to come .
she passed about five minutes each day in her mother 's sick - room , and no more . eliza still spoke little : she had evidently no time to talk . i never saw a busier person than she seemed to be ; yet it was difficult to say what she did : or rather , to discover any result of her diligence .
three times a day she studied a little book , which i found , on inspection , was a common prayer book .
two hours she devoted to her diary ; two to working by herself in the kitchen - garden ; and one to the regulation of her accounts .
she seemed to want no company ; no conversation . i believe she was happy in her way : this routine sufficed for her ; and nothing annoyed her so much as the occurrence of any incident which forced her to vary its clockwork regularity .
she told me one evening , when more disposed to be communicative than usual , that john 's conduct , and the threatened ruin of the family , had been a source of profound affliction to her : but she had now , she said , settled her mind , and formed her resolution . her own fortune she had taken care to secure ; and when her mother died -- and it was wholly improbable , she tranquilly remarked , that she should either recover or linger long -- she would execute a long - cherished project : seek a retirement where punctual habits would be permanently secured from disturbance , and place safe barriers between herself and a frivolous world .
i asked if georgiana would accompany her .
" of course not .
georgiana , when not unburdening her heart to me , spent most of her time in lying on the sofa , fretting about the dulness of the house , and wishing over and over again that her aunt gibson would send her an invitation up to town .
i did not ask what she meant by " all being over , " but i suppose she referred to the expected decease of her mother and the gloomy sequel of funeral rites .
" georgiana , a more vain and absurd animal than you was certainly never allowed to cumber the earth . you had no right to be born , for you make no use of life .
instead of living for , in , and with yourself , as a reasonable being ought , you seek only to fasten your feebleness on some other person 's strength : if no one can be found willing to burden her or himself with such a fat , weak , puffy , useless thing , you cry out that you are ill - treated , neglected , miserable . then , too , existence for you must be a scene of continual change and excitement , or else the world is a dungeon : you must be admired , you must be courted , you must be flattered -- you must have music , dancing , and society -- or you languish , you die away .
have you no sense to devise a system which will make you independent of all efforts , and all wills , but your own ?
take this advice : the first and last i shall offer you ; then you will not want me or any one else , happen what may .
i knew mrs . reed had not spoken for days : was she reviving ?
" it is i , aunt reed . "
" you are quite a stranger to me -- where is bessie ? "
" she is at the lodge , aunt . "
" aunt , " she repeated . " who calls me aunt ?
you are not one of the gibsons ; and yet i know you -- that face , and the eyes and forehead , are quiet familiar to me : you are like -- why , you are like jane eyre ! "
i said nothing : i was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring my identity .
" yet , " said she , " i am afraid it is a mistake : my thoughts deceive me . i wished to see jane eyre , and i fancy a likeness where none exists : besides , in eight years she must be so changed . "
i now gently assured her that i was the person she supposed and desired me to be : and seeing that i was understood , and that her senses were quite collected , i explained how bessie had sent her husband to fetch me from thornfield .
is the nurse here ? or is there no one in the room but you ? "
i assured her we were alone .
" well , i have twice done you a wrong which i regret now . one was in breaking the promise which i gave my husband to bring you up as my own child ; the other-- " she stopped .
" after all , it is of no great importance , perhaps , " she murmured to herself : " and then i may get better ; and to humble myself so to her is painful . "
she made an effort to alter her position , but failed : her face changed ; she seemed to experience some inward sensation -- the precursor , perhaps , of the last pang .
i obeyed her directions .
" read the letter , " she said .
it was short , and thus conceived:--
" madam,--will you have the goodness to send me the address of my niece , jane eyre , and to tell me how she is ?
" john eyre , madeira . "
it was dated three years back .
" why did i never hear of this ? " i asked .
she heeded nothing of what i said ; but when she had tasted the water and drawn breath , she went on thus--
" i tell you i could not forget it ; and i took my revenge : for you to be adopted by your uncle , and placed in a state of ease and comfort , was what i could not endure .
now act as you please : write and contradict my assertion -- expose my falsehood as soon as you like .
you were born , i think , to be my torment : my last hour is racked by the recollection of a deed which , but for you , i should never have been tempted to commit . "
" if you could but be persuaded to think no more of it , aunt , and to regard me with kindness and forgiveness "
" love me , then , or hate me , as you will , " i said at last , " you have my full and free forgiveness : ask now for god 's , and be at peace . "
eliza surveyed her parent calmly . after a silence of some minutes she observed--
" with her constitution she should have lived to a good old age : her life was shortened by trouble . "
and then a spasm constricted her mouth for an instant : as it passed away she turned and left the room , and so did i. neither of us had dropt a tear .
chapter xxii
one morning she told me i was at liberty .
i neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted to dissuade her from it .
when we parted , she said : " good - bye , cousin jane eyre ; i wish you well : you have some sense . "
my journey seemed tedious -- very tedious : fifty miles one day , a night spent at an inn ; fifty miles the next day .
during the first twelve hours i thought of mrs . reed in her last moments ; i saw her disfigured and discoloured face , and heard her strangely altered voice . i mused on the funeral day , the coffin , the hearse , the black train of tenants and servants -- few was the number of relatives -- the gaping vault , the silent church , the solemn service .
then i thought of eliza and georgiana ; i beheld one the cynosure of a ball - room , the other the inmate of a convent cell ; and i dwelt on and analysed their separate peculiarities of person and character .
i was going back to thornfield : but how long was i to stay there ?
not long ; of that i was sure .
i had heard from mrs . fairfax in the interim of my absence : the party at the hall was dispersed ; mr . rochester had left for london three weeks ago , but he was then expected to return in a fortnight .
i had not notified to mrs . fairfax the exact day of my return ; for i did not wish either car or carriage to meet me at millcote . i proposed to walk the distance quietly by myself ; and very quietly , after leaving my box in the ostler 's care , did i slip away from the george inn , about six o'clock of a june evening , and take the old road to thornfield : a road which lay chiefly through fields , and was now little frequented .
i passed a tall briar , shooting leafy and flowery branches across the path ; i see the narrow stile with stone steps ; and i see -- mr . rochester sitting there , a book and a pencil in his hand ; he is writing .
well , he is not a ghost ; yet every nerve i have is unstrung : for a moment i am beyond my own mastery .
what does it mean ?
i did not think i should tremble in this way when i saw him , or lose my voice or the power of motion in his presence .
i know another way to the house . it does not signify if i knew twenty ways ; for he has seen me .
what the deuce have you done with yourself this last month ? "
" i have been with my aunt , sir , who is dead . "
" a true janian reply ! good angels be my guard !
she comes from the other world -- from the abode of people who are dead ; and tells me so when she meets me alone here in the gloaming !
if i dared , i 'd touch you , to see if you are substance or shadow , you elf!--but i 'd as soon offer to take hold of a blue _ ignis fatuus _ light in a marsh .
truant ! truant ! " he added , when he had paused an instant . " absent from me a whole month , and forgetting me quite , i 'll be sworn ! "
his last words were balm : they seemed to imply that it imported something to him whether i forgot him or not . and he had spoken of thornfield as my home -- would that it were my home !
i inquired soon if he had not been to london .
" yes ; i suppose you found that out by second - sight . "
" mrs . fairfax told me in a letter . "
" and did she inform you what i went to do ? "
" oh , yes , sir ! everybody knew your errand . "
i wish , jane , i were a trifle better adapted to match with her externally . tell me now , fairy as you are -- can't you give me a charm , or a philter , or something of that sort , to make me a handsome man ? "
" it would be past the power of magic , sir ; " and , in thought , i added , " a loving eye is all the charm needed : to such you are handsome enough ; or rather your sternness has a power beyond beauty . "
" pass , janet , " said he , making room for me to cross the stile : " go up home , and stay your weary little wandering feet at a friend 's threshold . "
" thank you , mr . rochester , for your great kindness . i am strangely glad to get back again to you : and wherever you are is my home -- my only home . "
i walked on so fast that even he could hardly have overtaken me had he tried .
this was very pleasant ; there is no happiness like that of being loved by your fellow - creatures , and feeling that your presence is an addition to their comfort .
i that evening shut my eyes resolutely against the future : i stopped my cars against the voice that kept warning me of near separation and coming grief .
a fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to thornfield hall .
nothing was said of the master 's marriage , and i saw no preparation going on for such an event .
almost every day i asked mrs . fairfax if she had yet heard anything decided : her answer was always in the negative .
to so practised and indefatigable a horseman as mr . rochester , it would be but a morning 's ride .
i began to cherish hopes i had no right to conceive : that the match was broken off ; that rumour had been mistaken ; that one or both parties had changed their minds .
i used to look at my master 's face to see if it were sad or fierce ; but i could not remember the time when it had been so uniformly clear of clouds or evil feelings .
chapter xxiii
where the sun had gone down in simple state -- pure of the pomp of clouds -- spread a solemn purple , burning with the light of red jewel and furnace flame at one point , on one hill - peak , and extending high and wide , soft and still softer , over half heaven .
the east had its own charm or fine deep blue , and its own modest gem , a casino and solitary star : soon it would boast the moon ; but she was yet beneath the horizon .
sweet - briar and southernwood , jasmine , pink , and rose have long been yielding their evening sacrifice of incense : this new scent is neither of shrub nor flower ; it is -- i know it well -- it is mr . rochester 's cigar . i look round and i listen .
i see trees laden with ripening fruit . i hear a nightingale warbling in a wood half a mile off ; no moving form is visible , no coming step audible ; but that perfume increases : i must flee .
i make for the wicket leading to the shrubbery , and i see mr . rochester entering . i step aside into the ivy recess ; he will not stay long : he will soon return whence he came , and if i sit still he will never see me .
a great moth goes humming by me ; it alights on a plant at mr . rochester 's foot : he sees it , and bends to examine it .
" now , he has his back towards me , " thought i , " and he is occupied too ; perhaps , if i walk softly , i can slip away unnoticed . "
" jane , come and look at this fellow . "
the moth roamed away .
i was sheepishly retreating also ; but mr . rochester followed me , and when we reached the wicket , he said--
it is one of my faults , that though my tongue is sometimes prompt enough at an answer , there are times when it sadly fails me in framing an excuse ; and always the lapse occurs at some crisis , when a facile word or plausible pretext is specially wanted to get me out of painful embarrassment .
" jane , " he recommenced , as we entered the laurel walk , and slowly strayed down in the direction of the sunk fence and the horse - chestnut , " thornfield is a pleasant place in summer , is it not ? "
" yes , sir . "
" you must have become in some degree attached to the house,--you , who have an eye for natural beauties , and a good deal of the organ of adhesiveness ? "
" i am attached to it , indeed . "
" and though i do n't comprehend how it is , i perceive you have acquired a degree of regard for that foolish little child adele , too ; and even for simple dame fairfax ? "
" yes , sir ; in different ways , i have an affection for both . "
" and would be sorry to part with them ? "
" yes . "
" pity ! " he said , and sighed and paused .
" must i move on , sir ? " i asked . " must i leave thornfield ? "
this was a blow : but i did not let it prostrate me .
" well , sir , i shall be ready when the order to march comes . "
" it is come now -- i must give it to - night . "
" then you _ are _ going to be married , sir ? "
" ex - act - ly -- pre - cise - ly : with your usual acuteness , you have hit the nail straight on the head . "
" soon , sir ? "
adele must go to school ; and you , miss eyre , must get a new situation . "
" in about a month i hope to be a bridegroom , " continued mr . rochester ; " and in the interim , i shall myself look out for employment and an asylum for you . "
" it is a long way off , sir . "
" no matter -- a girl of your sense will not object to the voyage or the distance . "
" not the voyage , but the distance : and then the sea is a barrier-- "
" from what , jane ? "
" from england and from thornfield : and-- "
" well ? "
" from _ you _ , sir . "
" it is a long way , " i again said .
we have been good friends , jane ; have we not ? "
" yes , sir . "
he seated me and himself .
" it is a long way to ireland , janet , and i am sorry to send my little friend on such weary travels : but if i ca n't do better , how is it to be helped ?
are you anything akin to me , do you think , jane ? "
" that i _ never _ should , sir : you know-- " impossible to proceed .
" jane , do you hear that nightingale singing in the wood ? listen ! "
when i did speak , it was only to express an impetuous wish that i had never been born , or never come to thornfield . " because you are sorry to leave it ? "
" where do you see the necessity ? " he asked suddenly .
" where ? you , sir , have placed it before me . "
" in what shape ? "
" in the shape of miss ingram ; a noble and beautiful woman,--your bride . "
" my bride !
" but you will have . "
" yes;--i will!--i will ! " he set his teeth .
" then i must go:--you have said it yourself . "
" no : you must stay ! i swear it -- and the oath shall be kept . "
" i tell you i must go ! " i retorted , roused to something like passion .
i would scorn such a union : therefore i am better than you -- let me go ! "
" where , jane ?
to ireland ? "
" yes -- to ireland . i have spoken my mind , and can go anywhere now . "
" jane , be still ; do n't struggle so , like a wild frantic bird that is rending its own plumage in its desperation . "
another effort set me at liberty , and i stood erect before him .
" and your will shall decide your destiny , " he said : " i offer you my hand , my heart , and a share of all my possessions . "
" you play a farce , which i merely laugh at . "
" i ask you to pass through life at my side -- to be my second self , and best earthly companion . "
" for that fate you have already made your choice , and must abide by it . "
" jane , be still a few moments : you are over - excited : i will be still too . "
a waft of wind came sweeping down the laurel - walk , and trembled through the boughs of the chestnut : it wandered away -- away -- to an indefinite distance -- it died .
the nightingale 's song was then the only voice of the hour : in listening to it , i again wept .
mr . rochester sat quiet , looking at me gently and seriously . some time passed before he spoke ; he at last said--
" come to my side , jane , and let us explain and understand one another . "
" but , jane , i summon you as my wife : it is you only i intend to marry . "
i was silent : i thought he mocked me .
" come , jane -- come hither . "
" your bride stands between us . "
he rose , and with a stride reached me .
" my bride is here , " he said , again drawing me to him , " because my equal is here , and my likeness .
jane , will you marry me ? "
still i did not answer , and still i writhed myself from his grasp : for i was still incredulous .
" do you doubt me , jane ? "
" entirely . "
" you have no faith in me ? "
" not a whit . "
" am i a liar in your eyes ? " he asked passionately . " little sceptic , you _ shall _ be convinced .
what love have i for miss ingram ? none : and that you know .
what love has she for me ?
you -- you strange , you almost unearthly thing!--i love as my own flesh . you -- poor and obscure , and small and plain as you are -- i entreat to accept me as a husband . "
" you , jane , i must have you for my own -- entirely my own . will you be mine ?
say yes , quickly . " " mr . rochester , let me look at your face : turn to the moonlight . "
" why ? "
" because i want to read your countenance -- turn ! "
his face was very much agitated and very much flushed , and there were strong workings in the features , and strange gleams in the eyes .
" oh , jane , you torture me ! " he exclaimed . " with that searching and yet faithful and generous look , you torture me ! "
do you sincerely wish me to be your wife ? " " i do ; and if an oath is necessary to satisfy you , i swear it . "
" then , sir , i will marry you . "
" edward -- my little wife ! "
" dear edward ! "
and if i had loved him less i should have thought his accent and look of exultation savage ; but , sitting by him , roused from the nightmare of parting -- called to the paradise of union -- i thought only of the bliss given me to drink in so abundant a flow .
again and again he said , " are you happy , jane ? " and again and again i answered , " yes . "
after which he murmured , " it will atone -- it will atone .
he was taking off my shawl in the hall , and shaking the water out of my loosened hair , when mrs . fairfax emerged from her room .
i did not observe her at first , nor did mr . rochester . the lamp was lit . the clock was on the stroke of twelve .
" hasten to take off your wet things , " said he ; " and before you go , good- night -- good - night , my darling ! "
he kissed me repeatedly . when i looked up , on leaving his arms , there stood the widow , pale , grave , and amazed .
i only smiled at her , and ran upstairs .
chapter xxiv
as i rose and dressed , i thought over what had happened , and wondered if it were a dream . i could not be certain of the reality till i had seen mr . rochester again , and heard him renew his words of love and promise .
the rooks cawed , and blither birds sang ; but nothing was so merry or so musical as my own rejoicing heart .
mrs . fairfax surprised me by looking out of the window with a sad countenance , and saying gravely--"miss eyre , will you come to breakfast ? "
during the meal she was quiet and cool : but i could not undeceive her then .
i must wait for my master to give explanations ; and so must she .
" where are you going ?
it is time for lessons . " " mr . rochester has sent me away to the nursery . "
" where is he ? "
" jane , you look blooming , and smiling , and pretty , " said he : " truly pretty this morning .
is this my pale , little elf ? is this my mustard- seed ?
this little sunny - faced girl with the dimpled cheek and rosy lips ; the satin - smooth hazel hair , and the radiant hazel eyes ? "
( i had green eyes , reader ; but you must excuse the mistake : for him they were new - dyed , i suppose . )
" it is jane eyre , sir . "
" soon to be jane rochester , " he added : " in four weeks , janet ; not a day more . do you hear that ? "
" you blushed , and now you are white , jane : what is that for ? "
" because you gave me a new name -- jane rochester ; and it seems so strange . "
" yes , mrs . rochester , " said he ; " young mrs . rochester -- fairfax rochester 's girl - bride . "
" which i can and will realise . i shall begin to - day .
this morning i wrote to my banker in london to send me certain jewels he has in his keeping,--heirlooms for the ladies of thornfield . in a day or two i hope to pour them into your lap : for every privilege , every attention shall be yours that i would accord a peer 's daughter , if about to marry her . "
" you are a beauty in my eyes , and a beauty just after the desire of my heart,--delicate and aerial . "
" puny and insignificant , you mean .
you are dreaming , sir,--or you are sneering . for god 's sake do n't be ironical ! "
" i will make the world acknowledge you a beauty , too , " he went on , while i really became uneasy at the strain he had adopted , because i felt he was either deluding himself or trying to delude me .
" and then you wo n't know me , sir ; and i shall not be your jane eyre any longer , but an ape in a harlequin 's jacket -- a jay in borrowed plumes .
he pursued his theme , however , without noticing my deprecation .
" this very day i shall take you in the carriage to millcote , and you must choose some dresses for yourself .
" shall i travel?--and with you , sir ? "
" you shall sojourn at paris , rome , and naples : at florence , venice , and vienna : all the ground i have wandered over shall be re - trodden by you : wherever i stamped my hoof , your sylph 's foot shall step also .
ten years since , i flew through europe half mad ; with disgust , hate , and rage as my companions : now i shall revisit it healed and cleansed , with a very angel as my comforter . "
i laughed at him as he said this .
" what do you anticipate of me ? "
" yet are you not capricious , sir ? "
" had you ever experience of such a character , sir ? did you ever love such an one ? "
" i love it now . "
" but before me : if i , indeed , in any respect come up to your difficult standard ? "
" i was thinking , sir ( you will excuse the idea ; it was involuntary ) , i was thinking of hercules and samson with their charmers-- "
" you were , you little elfish-- "
" ask me something now , jane,--the least thing : i desire to be entreated-- "
" indeed i will , sir ; i have my petition all ready . "
" speak ! but if you look up and smile with that countenance , i shall swear concession before i know to what , and that will make a fool of me . "
" not at all , sir ; i ask only this : do n't send for the jewels , and do n't crown me with roses : you might as well put a border of gold lace round that plain pocket handkerchief you have there . "
" i might as well ' gild refined gold . ' i know it : your request is granted then -- for the time . i will remand the order i despatched to my banker .
but you have not yet asked for anything ; you have prayed a gift to be withdrawn : try again . "
" well then , sir , have the goodness to gratify my curiosity , which is much piqued on one point . "
he looked disturbed .
" but there can be no danger in complying with this , sir . "
i would much rather have all your confidence . you will not exclude me from your confidence if you admit me to your heart ? "
" why not , sir ? you have just been telling me how much you liked to be conquered , and how pleasant over - persuasion is to you .
this is what i have to ask,--why did you take such pains to make me believe you wished to marry miss ingram ? "
" is that all ?
thank god it is no worse ! "
and now he unknit his black brows ; looked down , smiling at me , and stroked my hair , as if well pleased at seeing a danger averted .
" excellent ! now you are small -- not one whit bigger than the end of my little finger .
" her feelings are concentrated in one -- pride ; and that needs humbling .
were you jealous , jane ? "
answer me truly once more . do you think miss ingram will not suffer from your dishonest coquetry ?
wo n't she feel forsaken and deserted ? "
" my principles were never trained , jane : they may have grown a little awry for want of attention . "
" once again , seriously ; may i enjoy the great good that has been vouchsafed to me , without fearing that any one else is suffering the bitter pain i myself felt a while ago ? "
i turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder .
i loved him very much -- more than i could trust myself to say -- more than words had power to express .
" ask something more , " he said presently ; " it is my delight to be entreated , and to yield . "
" communicate your intentions to mrs . fairfax , sir : she saw me with you last night in the hall , and she was shocked . give her some explanation before i see her again . it pains me to be misjudged by so good a woman . "
i was soon dressed ; and when i heard mr . rochester quit mrs . fairfax 's parlour , i hurried down to it .
the old lady , had been reading her morning portion of scripture -- the lesson for the day ; her bible lay open before her , and her spectacles were upon it . her occupation , suspended by mr . rochester 's announcement , seemed now forgotten : her eyes , fixed on the blank wall opposite , expressed the surprise of a quiet mind stirred by unwonted tidings .
seeing me , she roused herself : she made a sort of effort to smile , and framed a few words of congratulation ; but the smile expired , and the sentence was abandoned unfinished . she put up her spectacles , shut the bible , and pushed her chair back from the table .
i have surely not been dreaming , have i ?
do n't laugh at me . but i really thought he came in here five minutes ago , and said that in a month you would be his wife . "
" he has said the same thing to me , " i replied .
do you believe him ?
have you accepted him ? "
" yes . "
she looked at me bewildered .
" i could never have thought it .
he means to marry you ? "
" he tells me so . "
she surveyed my whole person : in her eyes i read that they had there found no charm powerful enough to solve the enigma .
" it passes me ! " she continued ; " but no doubt , it is true since you say so .
how it will answer , i can not tell : i really do n't know .
equality of position and fortune is often advisable in such cases ; and there are twenty years of difference in your ages . he might almost be your father . "
" is it really for love he is going to marry you ? " she asked .
i was so hurt by her coldness and scepticism , that the tears rose to my eyes .
" i am sorry to grieve you , " pursued the widow ; " but you are so young , and so little acquainted with men , i wished to put you on your guard .
" why?--am i a monster ? "
i said : " is it impossible that mr . rochester should have a sincere affection for me ? "
" well , never mind that now , " i interrupted impatiently ; " it is enough that all was right . "
i was growing truly irritated : happily , adele ran in .
" that i will , adele ; " and i hastened away with her , glad to quit my gloomy monitress .
" adele may accompany us , may she not , sir ? "
" not it : she will be a restraint . " he was quite peremptory , both in look and voice . the chill of mrs . fairfax 's warnings , and the damp of her doubts were upon me : something of unsubstantiality and uncertainty had beset my hopes . i half lost the sense of power over him .
do you really wish the bairn to go ? will it annoy you if she is left behind ? "
" i would far rather she went , sir . "
" then off for your bonnet , and back like a flash of lightning ! " cried he to adele .
she obeyed him with what speed she might .
adele , when lifted in , commenced kissing me , by way of expressing her gratitude for my intercession : she was instantly stowed away into a corner on the other side of him .
she then peeped round to where i sat ; so stern a neighbour was too restrictive to him , in his present fractious mood , she dared whisper no observations , nor ask of him any information .
" let her come to me , " i entreated : " she will , perhaps , trouble you , sir : there is plenty of room on this side . "
he handed her over as if she had been a lapdog . " i 'll send her to school yet , " he said , but now he was smiling .
adele heard him , and asked if she was to go to school " sans mademoiselle ? "
" yes , " he replied , " absolutely sans mademoiselle ; for i am to take mademoiselle to the moon , and there i shall seek a cave in one of the white valleys among the volcano - tops , and mademoiselle shall live with me there , and only me . "
" she will have nothing to eat : you will starve her , " observed adele .
" i shall gather manna for her morning and night : the plains and hillsides in the moon are bleached with manna , adele . "
" she will want to warm herself : what will she do for a fire ? "
" fire rises out of the lunar mountains : when she is cold , i 'll carry her up to a peak , and lay her down on the edge of a crater . "
" oh , qu ' elle y sera mal -- peu comfortable !
and her clothes , they will wear out : how can she get new ones ? "
mr . rochester professed to be puzzled .
how would a white or a pink cloud answer for a gown , do you think ? and one could cut a pretty enough scarf out of a rainbow . "
" she is far better as she is , " concluded adele , after musing some time : " besides , she would get tired of living with only you in the moon .
if i were mademoiselle , i would never consent to go with you . "
" she has consented : she has pledged her word . "
" adele , look at that field . "
i looked at it . it was a little thing with a veil of gossamer on its head .
' put it , ' she said , ' on the fourth finger of my left hand , and i am yours , and you are mine ; and we shall leave earth , and make our own heaven yonder . '
the ring , adele , is in my breeches - pocket , under the disguise of a sovereign : but i mean soon to change it to a ring again . "
" but what has mademoiselle to do with it ?
i do n't care for the fairy : you said it was mademoiselle you would take to the moon ? "
" mademoiselle is a fairy , " he said , whispering mysteriously .
the hour spent at millcote was a somewhat harassing one to me .
mr . rochester obliged me to go to a certain silk warehouse : there i was ordered to choose half - a - dozen dresses . i hated the business , i begged leave to defer it : no -- it should be gone through with now .
" oh , it is rich to see and hear her ? " he exclaimed .
the eastern allusion bit me again .
" i would consent to be at your mercy , jane . "
" i would have no mercy , mr . rochester , if you supplicated for it with an eye like that . while you looked so , i should be certain that whatever charter you might grant under coercion , your first act , when released , would be to violate its conditions . "
we were now approaching thornfield .
he duly summoned me to his presence in the evening .
i was no vocalist myself , and , in his fastidious judgment , no musician , either ; but i delighted in listening when the performance was good .
no sooner had twilight , that hour of romance , began to lower her blue and starry banner over the lattice , than i rose , opened the piano , and entreated him , for the love of heaven , to give me a song .
" did i like his voice ? " he asked .
" very much . "
i was not fond of pampering that susceptible vanity of his ; but for once , and from motives of expediency , i would e'en soothe and stimulate it .
" then , jane , you must play the accompaniment . "
" very well , sir , i will try . "
i did try , but was presently swept off the stool and denominated " a little bungler . " being pushed unceremoniously to one side -- which was precisely what i wished -- he usurped my place , and proceeded to accompany himself : for he could play as well as sing .
" the truest love that ever heart felt at its kindled core , did through each vein , in quickened start , the tide of being pour .
her coming was my hope each day , her parting was my pain ; the chance that did her steps delay was ice in every vein .
i dreamed it would be nameless bliss , as i loved , loved to be ; and to this object did i press as blind as eagerly .
he rose and came towards me , and i saw his face all kindled , and his full falcon - eye flashing , and tenderness and passion in every lineament .
" that was a strange question to be put by his darling jane . "
what did he mean by such a pagan idea ? _ i _ had no intention of dying with him -- he might depend on that . "
" would i forgive him for the selfish idea , and prove my pardon by a reconciling kiss ? "
" no : i would rather be excused . "
here i heard myself apostrophised as a " hard little thing ; " and it was added , " any other woman would have been melted to marrow at hearing such stanzas crooned in her praise . "
" would i be quiet and talk rationally ? "
" i would be quiet if he liked , and as to talking rationally , i flattered myself i was doing that now . "
he fretted , pished , and pshawed .
" very good , " i thought ; " you may fume and fidget as you please : but this is the best plan to pursue with you , i am certain .
the system thus entered on , i pursued during the whole season of probation ; and with the best success .
he continued to send for me punctually the moment the clock struck seven ; though when i appeared before him now , he had no such honeyed terms as " love " and " darling " on his lips : the best words at my service were " provoking puppet , " " malicious elf , " " sprite , " " changeling , " & c.
mrs . fairfax , i saw , approved me : her anxiety on my account vanished ; therefore i was certain i did well .
yet after all my task was not an easy one ; often i would rather have pleased than teased him .
i could not , in those days , see god for his creature : of whom i had made an idol .
chapter xxv
the month of courtship had wasted : its very last hours were being numbered .
mr . rochester had himself written the direction , " mrs . rochester , --- hotel , london , " on each : i could not persuade myself to affix them , or to have them affixed .
mrs . rochester !
it was enough that in yonder closet , opposite my dressing - table , garments said to be hers had already displaced my black stuff lowood frock and straw bonnet : for not to me appertained that suit of wedding raiment ; the pearl - coloured robe , the vapoury veil pendent from the usurped portmanteau .
i shut the closet to conceal the strange , wraith - like apparel it contained ; which , at this evening hour -- nine o'clock -- gave out certainly a most ghostly shimmer through the shadow of my apartment .
" i am feverish : i hear the wind blowing : i will go out of doors and feel it . "
i waited now his return ; eager to disburthen my mind , and to seek of him the solution of the enigma that perplexed me .
more restless than ever , when i had completed these arrangements i could not sit still , nor even remain in the house : a little time - piece in the room and the old clock in the hall simultaneously struck ten .
i lingered ; the moon shut herself wholly within her chamber , and drew close her curtain of dense cloud : the night grew dark ; rain came driving fast on the gale .
" i wish he would come ! i wish he would come ! " i exclaimed , seized with hypochondriac foreboding .
i had expected his arrival before tea ; now it was dark : what could keep him ?
had an accident happened ?
i interpreted it as a warning of disaster . i feared my hopes were too bright to be realised ; and i had enjoyed so much bliss lately that i imagined my fortune had passed its meridian , and must now decline .
away with evil presentiment ! it was he : here he was , mounted on mesrour , followed by pilot .
he saw me ; for the moon had opened a blue field in the sky , and rode in it watery bright : he took his hat off , and waved it round his head . i now ran to meet him .
" no , but i thought you would never come . i could not bear to wait in the house for you , especially with this rain and wind . "
i ask again , is there anything the matter ? "
" nothing now ; i am neither afraid nor unhappy . "
" then you have been both ? "
this is you , who have been as slippery as an eel this last month , and as thorny as a briar - rose ? i could not lay a finger anywhere but i was pricked ; and now i seem to have gathered up a stray lamb in my arms .
you wandered out of the fold to seek your shepherd , did you , jane ? "
" i wanted you : but do n't boast .
here we are at thornfield : now let me get down . "
i sat down near him , but told him i could not eat .
" except me : i am substantial enough -- touch me . "
" you , sir , are the most phantom - like of all : you are a mere dream . "
he had a rounded , muscular , and vigorous hand , as well as a long , strong arm .
" sir , have you finished supper ? "
" yes , jane . "
i rang the bell and ordered away the tray .
when we were again alone , i stirred the fire , and then took a low seat at my master 's knee .
" it is near midnight , " i said .
" yes : but remember , jane , you promised to wake with me the night before my wedding . "
" are all your arrangements complete ? "
" all , sir . "
" and on my part likewise , " he returned , " i have settled everything ; and we shall leave thornfield to - morrow , within half - an - hour after our return from church . "
" very well , sir . "
are you well ? "
" i believe i am . "
what is the matter ?
tell me what you feel . "
" i could not , sir : no words could tell you what i feel .
" this is hypochondria , jane . you have been over - excited , or over - fatigued . "
" do you , sir , feel calm and happy ? "
" calm?--no : but happy -- to the heart 's core . "
i looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in his face : it was ardent and flushed .
what do you fear?--that i shall not prove a good husband ? "
" it is the idea farthest from my thoughts . "
" are you apprehensive of the new sphere you are about to enter?--of the new life into which you are passing ? "
" no . "
" you puzzle me , jane : your look and tone of sorrowful audacity perplex and pain me . i want an explanation . "
" then , sir , listen . you were from home last night ? "
mrs . fairfax has said something , perhaps ? or you have overheard the servants talk?--your sensitive self - respect has been wounded ? "
" no , sir . "
it struck twelve -- i waited till the time - piece had concluded its silver chime , and the clock its hoarse , vibrating stroke , and then i proceeded .
" all day yesterday i was very busy , and very happy in my ceaseless bustle ; for i am not , as you seem to think , troubled by any haunting fears about the new sphere , et cetera : i think it a glorious thing to have the hope of living with you , because i love you .
i walked a little while on the pavement after tea , thinking of you ; and i beheld you in imagination so near me , i scarcely missed your actual presence .
i wondered why moralists call this world a dreary wilderness : for me it blossomed like a rose .
just at sunset , the air turned cold and the sky cloudy : i went in , sophie called me upstairs to look at my wedding - dress , which they had just brought ; and under it in the box i found your present -- the veil which , in your princely extravagance , you sent for from london : resolved , i suppose , since i would not have jewels , to cheat me into accepting something as costly .
" how well you read me , you witch ! " interposed mr . rochester : " but what did you find in the veil besides its embroidery ?
did you find poison , or a dagger , that you look so mournful now ? "
i came into this room , and the sight of the empty chair and fireless hearth chilled me .
i was glad when it ceased . on sleeping , i continued in dreams the idea of a dark and gusty night . i continued also the wish to be with you , and experienced a strange , regretful consciousness of some barrier dividing us .
i thought , sir , that you were on the road a long way before me ; and i strained every nerve to overtake you , and made effort on effort to utter your name and entreat you to stop -- but my movements were fettered , and my voice still died away inarticulate ; while you , i felt , withdrew farther and farther every moment . "
" and these dreams weigh on your spirits now , jane , when i am close to you ? little nervous subject !
forget visionary woe , and think only of real happiness !
do you love me , jane?--repeat it . "
" i do , sir -- i do , with my whole heart . "
" well , " he said , after some minutes ' silence , " it is strange ; but that sentence has penetrated my breast painfully .
look wicked , jane : as you know well how to look : coin one of your wild , shy , provoking smiles ; tell me you hate me -- tease me , vex me ; do anything but move me : i would rather be incensed than saddened . "
" i will tease you and vex you to your heart 's content , when i have finished my tale : but hear me to the end . "
" what ! is there more ?
go on . "
the disquietude of his air , the somewhat apprehensive impatience of his manner , surprised me : but i proceeded .
" i dreamt another dream , sir : that thornfield hall was a dreary ruin , the retreat of bats and owls . i thought that of all the stately front nothing remained but a shell - like wall , very high and very fragile - looking . i wandered , on a moonlight night , through the grass- grown enclosure within : here i stumbled over a marble hearth , and there over a fallen fragment of cornice .
wrapped up in a shawl , i still carried the unknown little child : i might not lay it down anywhere , however tired were my arms -- however much its weight impeded my progress , i must retain it .
i heard the gallop of a horse at a distance on the road ; i was sure it was you ; and you were departing for many years and for a distant country .
the blast blew so strong i could not stand .
" now , jane , that is all . "
" all the preface , sir ; the tale is yet to come .
on waking , a gleam dazzled my eyes ; i thought -- oh , it is daylight !
i asked , ' sophie , what are you doing ? '
sophie ! ' i again cried : and still it was silent .
i had risen up in bed , i bent forward : first surprise , then bewilderment , came over me ; and then my blood crept cold through my veins .
mr . rochester , this was not sophie , it was not leah , it was not mrs . fairfax : it was not -- no , i was sure of it , and am still -- it was not even that strange woman , grace poole . "
" it must have been one of them , " interrupted my master .
" describe it , jane . "
" it seemed , sir , a woman , tall and large , with thick and dark hair hanging long down her back .
" did you see her face ? "
" and how were they ? "
" fearful and ghastly to me -- oh , sir , i never saw a face like it !
it was a discoloured face -- it was a savage face . i wish i could forget the roll of the red eyes and the fearful blackened inflation of the lineaments ! "
" ghosts are usually pale , jane . "
" this , sir , was purple : the lips were swelled and dark ; the brow furrowed : the black eyebrows widely raised over the bloodshot eyes .
shall i tell you of what it reminded me ? "
" you may . "
" of the foul german spectre -- the vampyre . "
" ah!--what did it do ? "
" sir , it removed my veil from its gaunt head , rent it in two parts , and flinging both on the floor , trampled on them . "
" afterwards ? "
" who was with you when you revived ? "
now , sir , tell me who and what that woman was ? "
" and your previous dreams , were they real too ?
is thornfield hall a ruin ?
am i severed from you by insuperable obstacles ?
am i leaving you without a tear -- without a kiss -- without a word ? "
" not yet . "
" am i about to do it ?
why , the day is already commenced which is to bind us indissolubly ; and when we are once united , there shall be no recurrence of these mental terrors : i guarantee that . "
" mental terrors , sir !
i wish i could believe them to be only such : i wish it more now than ever ; since even you can not explain to me the mystery of that awful visitant . "
" and since i can not do it , jane , it must have been unreal . "
i felt mr . rochester start and shudder ; he hastily flung his arms round me .
oh , to think what might have happened ! "
he drew his breath short , and strained me so close to him , i could scarcely pant .
after some minutes ' silence , he continued , cheerily--
in a state between sleeping and waking , you noticed her entrance and her actions ; but feverish , almost delirious as you were , you ascribed to her a goblin appearance different from her own : the long dishevelled hair , the swelled black face , the exaggerated stature , were figments of imagination ; results of nightmare : the spiteful tearing of the veil was real : and it is like her .
i see you would ask why i keep such a woman in my house : when we have been married a year and a day , i will tell you ; but not now .
are you satisfied , jane ?
do you accept my solution of the mystery ? "
" does not sophie sleep with adele in the nursery ? " he asked , as i lit my candle .
" yes , sir . "
" and there is room enough in adele 's little bed for you . you must share it with her to - night , jane : it is no wonder that the incident you have related should make you nervous , and i would rather you did not sleep alone : promise me to go to the nursery . "
" i shall be very glad to do so , sir . "
" and fasten the door securely on the inside .
and now , no more sombre thoughts : chase dull care away , janet .
do n't you hear to what soft whispers the wind has fallen ? and there is no more beating of rain against the window - panes : look here " ( he lifted up the curtain)--"it is a lovely night ! "
it was . half heaven was pure and stainless : the clouds , now trooping before the wind , which had shifted to the west , were filing off eastward in long , silvered columns . the moon shone peacefully .
" well , " said mr . rochester , gazing inquiringly into my eyes , " how is my janet now ? "
" the night is serene , sir ; and so am i. "
" and you will not dream of separation and sorrow to - night ; but of happy love and blissful union . "
she seemed the emblem of my past life ; and here i was now to array myself to meet , the dread , but adored , type of my unknown future day .
chapter xxvi
sophie came at seven to dress me : she was very long indeed in accomplishing her task ; so long that mr . rochester , grown , i suppose , impatient of my delay , sent up to ask why i did not come .
she was just fastening my veil ( the plain square of blond after all ) to my hair with a brooch ; i hurried from under her hands as soon as i could .
" stop ! " she cried in french . " look at yourself in the mirror : you have not taken one peep . "
so i turned at the door : i saw a robed and veiled figure , so unlike my usual self that it seemed almost the image of a stranger .
" jane ! " called a voice , and i hastened down .
i was received at the foot of the stairs by mr . rochester .
" lingerer ! " he said , " my brain is on fire with impatience , and you tarry so long ! "
one of his lately hired servants , a footman , answered it .
" is john getting the carriage ready ? "
" yes , sir . "
" is the luggage brought down ? "
" they are bringing it down , sir . "
" go you to the church : see if mr . wood ( the clergyman ) and the clerk are there : return and tell me . "
the church , as the reader knows , was but just beyond the gates ; the footman soon returned .
" mr . wood is in the vestry , sir , putting on his surplice . "
" and the carriage ? "
" the horses are harnessing . "
" yes , sir . "
" jane , are you ready ? "
i rose .
at the churchyard wicket he stopped : he discovered i was quite out of breath .
" am i cruel in my love ? " he said . " delay an instant : lean on me , jane . "
and now i can recall the picture of the grey old house of god rising calm before me , of a rook wheeling round the steeple , of a ruddy morning sky beyond .
by mr . rochester they were not observed ; he was earnestly looking at my face from which the blood had , i daresay , momentarily fled : for i felt my forehead dewy , and my cheeks and lips cold .
we entered the quiet and humble temple ; the priest waited in his white surplice at the lowly altar , the clerk beside him .
all was still : two shadows only moved in a remote corner .
my conjecture had been correct : the strangers had slipped in before us , and they now stood by the vault of the rochesters , their backs towards us , viewing through the rails the old time - stained marble tomb , where a kneeling angel guarded the remains of damer de rochester , slain at marston moor in the time of the civil wars , and of elizabeth , his wife .
our place was taken at the communion rails .
and the clergyman , who had not lifted his eyes from his book , and had held his breath but for a moment , was proceeding : his hand was already stretched towards mr . rochester , as his lips unclosed to ask , " wilt thou have this woman for thy wedded wife?"--when a distinct and near voice said--
" the marriage can not go on : i declare the existence of an impediment . "
profound silence fell when he had uttered that word , with deep but low intonation . presently mr . wood said--
" i can not proceed without some investigation into what has been asserted , and evidence of its truth or falsehood . "
what a hot and strong grasp he had ! and how like quarried marble was his pale , firm , massive front at this moment ! how his eye shone , still watchful , and yet wild beneath !
mr . wood seemed at a loss . " what is the nature of the impediment ? " he asked . " perhaps it may be got over -- explained away ? "
" hardly , " was the answer . " i have called it insuperable , and i speak advisedly . "
the speaker came forward and leaned on the rails . he continued , uttering each word distinctly , calmly , steadily , but not loudly--
" it simply consists in the existence of a previous marriage . mr . rochester has a wife now living . "
without speaking , without smiling , without seeming to recognise in me a human being , he only twined my waist with his arm and riveted me to his side .
" who are you ? " he asked of the intruder .
" my name is briggs , a solicitor of --- street , london . "
" and you would thrust on me a wife ? "
" i would remind you of your lady 's existence , sir , which the law recognises , if you do not . "
" favour me with an account of her -- with her name , her parentage , her place of abode . "
" certainly . "
mr . briggs calmly took a paper from his pocket , and read out in a sort of official , nasal voice:--
signed , richard mason . ' "
" that -- if a genuine document -- may prove i have been married , but it does not prove that the woman mentioned therein as my wife is still living . "
" she was living three months ago , " returned the lawyer .
" how do you know ? "
" produce him -- or go to hell . "
mr . rochester turned and glared at him .
an inaudible reply escaped mason 's white lips .
" the devil is in it if you can not answer distinctly .
i again demand , what have you to say ? "
" sir -- sir , " interrupted the clergyman , " do not forget you are in a sacred place . "
then addressing mason , he inquired gently , " are you aware , sir , whether or not this gentleman 's wife is still living ? "
" courage , " urged the lawyer,--"speak out . "
" she is now living at thornfield hall , " said mason , in more articulate tones : " i saw her there last april . i am her brother . "
" at thornfield hall ! " ejaculated the clergyman . " impossible ! i am an old resident in this neighbourhood , sir , and i never heard of a mrs . rochester at thornfield hall . "
i saw a grim smile contort mr . rochester 's lips , and he muttered--
" no , by god ! i took care that none should hear of it -- or of her under that name . "
wood , close your book and take off your surplice ; john green ( to the clerk ) , leave the church : there will be no wedding to - day . "
the man obeyed .
mr . rochester continued , hardily and recklessly : " bigamy is an ugly word!--i meant , however , to be a bigamist ; but fate has out - manoeuvred me , or providence has checked me,--perhaps the last .
gentlemen , my plan is broken up:--what this lawyer and his client say is true : i have been married , and the woman to whom i was married lives !
i now inform you that she is my wife , whom i married fifteen years ago,--bertha mason by name ; sister of this resolute personage , who is now , with his quivering limbs and white cheeks , showing you what a stout heart men may bear .
cheer up , dick!--never fear me!--i'd almost as soon strike a woman as you .
bertha mason is mad ; and she came of a mad family ; idiots and maniacs through three generations ! her mother , the creole , was both a madwoman and a drunkard!--as i found out after i had we d the daughter : for they were silent on family secrets before .
bertha , like a dutiful child , copied her parent in both points . i had a charming partner -- pure , wise , modest : you can fancy i was a happy man . i went through rich scenes ! oh ! my experience has been heavenly , if you only knew it !
but i owe you no further explanation .
briggs , wood , mason , i invite you all to come up to the house and visit mrs . poole 's patient , and _ my wife _ ! you shall see what sort of a being i was cheated into espousing , and judge whether or not i had a right to break the compact , and seek sympathy with something at least human .
come all of you -- follow ! "
still holding me fast , he left the church : the three gentlemen came after . at the front door of the hall we found the carriage .
" take it back to the coach - house , john , " said mr . rochester coolly ; " it will not be wanted to - day . "
at our entrance , mrs . fairfax , adele , sophie , leah , advanced to meet and greet us .
" to the right - about -- every soul ! " cried the master ; " away with your congratulations ! who wants them ? not i!--they are fifteen years too late ! "
we mounted the first staircase , passed up the gallery , proceeded to the third storey : the low , black door , opened by mr . rochester 's master - key , admitted us to the tapestried room , with its great bed and its pictorial cabinet .
" you know this place , mason , " said our guide ; " she bit and stabbed you here . "
he lifted the hangings from the wall , uncovering the second door : this , too , he opened .
in a room without a window , there burnt a fire guarded by a high and strong fender , and a lamp suspended from the ceiling by a chain . grace poole bent over the fire , apparently cooking something in a saucepan .
in the deep shade , at the farther end of the room , a figure ran backwards and forwards . what it was , whether beast or human being , one could not , at first sight , tell : it grovelled , seemingly , on all fours ; it snatched and growled like some strange wild animal : but it was covered with clothing , and a quantity of dark , grizzled hair , wild as a mane , hid its head and face .
" good - morrow , mrs . poole ! " said mr . rochester . " how are you ? and how is your charge to - day ? "
" we 're tolerable , sir , i thank you , " replied grace , lifting the boiling mess carefully on to the hob : " rather snappish , but not ' rageous . "
a fierce cry seemed to give the lie to her favourable report : the clothed hyena rose up , and stood tall on its hind - feet .
" ah ! sir , she sees you ! " exclaimed grace : " you 'd better not stay . "
" only a few moments , grace : you must allow me a few moments . "
" take care then , sir!--for god 's sake , take care ! "
the maniac bellowed : she parted her shaggy locks from her visage , and gazed wildly at her visitors .
i recognised well that purple face,--those bloated features .
" one never knows what she has , sir : she is so cunning : it is not in mortal discretion to fathom her craft . "
" we had better leave her , " whispered mason .
" go to the devil ! " was his brother - in - law 's recommendation .
" ' ware ! " cried grace .
the three gentlemen retreated simultaneously . mr . rochester flung me behind him : the lunatic sprang and grappled his throat viciously , and laid her teeth to his cheek : they struggled .
she was a big woman , in stature almost equalling her husband , and corpulent besides : she showed virile force in the contest -- more than once she almost throttled him , athletic as he was .
he could have settled her with a well - planted blow ; but he would not strike : he would only wrestle .
at last he mastered her arms ; grace poole gave him a cord , and he pinioned them behind her : with more rope , which was at hand , he bound her to a chair .
the operation was performed amidst the fiercest yells and the most convulsive plunges . mr . rochester then turned to the spectators : he looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate . " that is _ my wife _ , " said he .
wood and briggs , look at the difference ! compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder -- this face with that mask -- this form with that bulk ; then judge me , priest of the gospel and man of the law , and remember with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged !
off with you now . i must shut up my prize . "
" you , madam , " said he , " are cleared from all blame : your uncle will be glad to hear it -- if , indeed , he should be still living -- when mr . mason returns to madeira . "
" my uncle !
what of him ? do you know him ? "
" mr . mason does . mr . eyre has been the funchal correspondent of his house for some years .
when your uncle received your letter intimating the contemplated union between yourself and mr . rochester , mr . mason , who was staying at madeira to recruit his health , on his way back to jamaica , happened to be with him .
mr . eyre mentioned the intelligence ; for he knew that my client here was acquainted with a gentleman of the name of rochester . mr . mason , astonished and distressed as you may suppose , revealed the real state of matters .
he could not then hasten to england himself , to extricate you from the snare into which you had fallen , but he implored mr . mason to lose no time in taking steps to prevent the false marriage .
were i not morally certain that your uncle will be dead ere you reach madeira , i would advise you to accompany mr . mason back ; but as it is , i think you had better remain in england till you can hear further , either from or of mr . eyre .
have we anything else to stay for ? " he inquired of mr . mason .
the clergyman stayed to exchange a few sentences , either of admonition or reproof , with his haughty parishioner ; this duty done , he too departed .
i heard him go as i stood at the half - open door of my own room , to which i had now withdrawn .
my hopes were all dead -- struck with a subtle doom , such as , in one night , fell on all the first - born in the land of egypt .
mr . rochester was not to me what he had been ; for he was not what i had thought him .
when -- how -- whither , i could not yet discern ; but he himself , i doubted not , would hurry me from thornfield .
oh , how blind had been my eyes ! how weak my conduct !
" be not far from me , for trouble is near : there is none to help . "
the whole consciousness of my life lorn , my love lost , my hope quenched , my faith death - struck , swayed full and mighty above me in one sullen mass .
that bitter hour can not be described : in truth , " the waters came into my soul ; i sank in deep mire : i felt no standing ; i came into deep waters ; the floods overflowed me . "
chapter xxvii
" let me be torn away , " then i cried . " let another help me ! "
i rose up suddenly , terror - struck at the solitude which so ruthless a judge haunted,--at the silence which so awful a voice filled . my head swam as i stood erect .
i perceived that i was sickening from excitement and inanition ; neither meat nor drink had passed my lips that day , for i had taken no breakfast .
" friends always forget those whom fortune forsakes , " i murmured , as i undrew the bolt and passed out .
but i err : you have not wept at all ! i see a white cheek and a faded eye , but no trace of tears .
i suppose , then , your heart has been weeping blood ? "
" well , jane ! not a word of reproach ?
nothing bitter -- nothing poignant ?
will you ever forgive me ? "
reader , i forgave him at the moment and on the spot .
" you know i am a scoundrel , jane ? " ere long he inquired wistfully -- wondering , i suppose , at my continued silence and tameness , the result rather of weakness than of will .
" yes , sir . "
" then tell me so roundly and sharply -- don't spare me . "
" i can not : i am tired and sick . i want some water . "
he heaved a sort of shuddering sigh , and taking me in his arms , carried me downstairs .
he put wine to my lips ; i tasted it and revived ; then i ate something he offered me , and was soon myself .
i must leave him , it appears . i do not want to leave him -- i can not leave him . " " how are you now , jane ? "
" much better , sir ; i shall be well soon . "
" taste the wine again , jane . "
i obeyed him ; then he put the glass on the table , stood before me , and looked at me attentively .
" not in your sense of the word , but in mine you are scheming to destroy me .
" sir , " i interrupted him , " you are inexorable for that unfortunate lady : you speak of her with hate -- with vindictive antipathy . it is cruel -- she can not help being mad . "
" i do indeed , sir . "
i was talking of removing you from thornfield . all , you know , is prepared for prompt departure : to - morrow you shall go .
" and take adele with you , sir , " i interrupted ; " she will be a companion for you . "
i told you i would send adele to school ; and what do i want with a child for a companion , and not my own child,--a french dancer 's bastard ? why do you importune me about her !
i say , why do you assign adele to me for a companion ? "
" you spoke of a retirement , sir ; and retirement and solitude are dull : too dull for you . "
" solitude ! solitude ! " he reiterated with irritation .
" i see i must come to an explanation . i do n't know what sphynx - like expression is forming in your countenance .
you are to share my solitude . do you understand ? "
i shook my head : it required a degree of courage , excited as he was becoming , even to risk that mute sign of dissent .
he recommenced his walk , but soon again stopped , and this time just before me .
" jane ! will you hear reason ? " ( he stooped and approached his lips to my ear ) ; " because , if you wo n't , i 'll try violence . "
his voice was hoarse ; his look that of a man who is just about to burst an insufferable bond and plunge headlong into wild license .
i took hold of his clenched hand , loosened the contorted fingers , and said to him , soothingly--
he sat down : but he did not get leave to speak directly .
" but i am not angry , jane : i only love you too well ; and you had steeled your little pale face with such a resolute , frozen look , i could not endure it .
hush , now , and wipe your eyes . "
his softened voice announced that he was subdued ; so i , in my turn , became calm .
now he made an effort to rest his head on my shoulder , but i would not permit it . then he would draw me to him : no .
" jane ! jane ! " he said , in such an accent of bitter sadness it thrilled along every nerve i had ; " you do n't love me , then ?
it was only my station , and the rank of my wife , that you valued ? now that you think me disqualified to become your husband , you recoil from my touch as if i were some toad or ape . "
" the last time , jane !
what ! do you think you can live with me , and see me daily , and yet , if you still love me , be always cold and distant ? "
" oh , mention it ! if i storm , you have the art of weeping . "
" mr . rochester , i must leave you . "
" for how long , jane ?
for a few minutes , while you smooth your hair -- which is somewhat dishevelled ; and bathe your face -- which looks feverish ? "
" i must leave adele and thornfield . i must part with you for my whole life : i must begin a new existence among strange faces and strange scenes . "
" of course : i told you you should .
i pass over the madness about parting from me . you mean you must become a part of me .
never fear that i wish to lure you into error -- to make you my mistress .
why did you shake your head ?
jane , you must be reasonable , or in truth i shall again become frantic . "
his voice and hand quivered : his large nostrils dilated ; his eye blazed : still i dared to speak .
he bared his wrist , and offered it to me : the blood was forsaking his cheek and lips , they were growing livid ; i was distressed on all hands .
to agitate him thus deeply , by a resistance he so abhorred , was cruel : to yield was out of the question .
" yes , sir ; for hours if you will . "
" i remember mrs . fairfax told me so once . "
" and did you ever hear that my father was an avaricious , grasping man ? "
" i have understood something to that effect . "
mr . mason , a west india planter and merchant , was his old acquaintance .
my father said nothing about her money ; but he told me miss mason was the boast of spanish town for her beauty : and this was no lie .
i found her a fine woman , in the style of blanche ingram : tall , dark , and majestic .
her family wished to secure me because i was of a good race ; and so did she . they showed her to me in parties , splendidly dressed . i seldom saw her alone , and had very little private conversation with her .
she flattered me , and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms and accomplishments .
" my bride 's mother i had never seen : i understood she was dead .
the honeymoon over , i learned my mistake ; she was only mad , and shut up in a lunatic asylum .
there was a younger brother , too -- a complete dumb idiot .
the elder one , whom you have seen ( and whom i can not hate , whilst i abhor all his kindred , because he has some grains of affection in his feeble mind , shown in the continued interest he takes in his wretched sister , and also in a dog - like attachment he once bore me ) , will probably be in the same state one day .
my father and my brother rowland knew all this ; but they thought only of the thirty thousand pounds , and joined in the plot against me . "
bertha mason , the true daughter of an infamous mother , dragged me through all the hideous and degrading agonies which must attend a man bound to a wife at once intemperate and unchaste .
jane , you do n't like my narrative ; you look almost sick -- shall i defer the rest to another day ? "
" now , sir , proceed ; what did you do when you found she was mad ? "
thus , at the age of twenty - six , i was hopeless .
" ' this life , ' said i at last , ' is hell : this is the air -- those are the sounds of the bottomless pit !
of the fanatic 's burning eternity i have no fear : there is not a future state worse than this present one -- let me break away , and go home to god ! '
see that she is cared for as her condition demands , and you have done all that god and humanity require of you .
glad was i when i at last got her to thornfield , and saw her safely lodged in that third - storey room , of whose secret inner cabinet she has now for ten years made a wild beast 's den -- a goblin 's cell .
at last i hired grace poole from the grimbsy retreat .
she and the surgeon , carter ( who dressed mason 's wounds that night he was stabbed and worried ) , are the only two i have ever admitted to my confidence . mrs . fairfax may indeed have suspected something , but she could have gained no precise knowledge as to facts .
" but you could not marry , sir . "
" i had determined and was convinced that i could and ought .
" well , sir ? "
but before i go on , tell me what you mean by your ' well , sir ? '
" i mean,--what next ? how did you proceed ?
what came of such an event ? "
" precisely ! and what do you wish to know now ? "
" whether you found any one you liked : whether you asked her to marry you ; and what she said . "
for ten long years i roved about , living first in one capital , then another : sometimes in st . petersburg ; oftener in paris ; occasionally in rome , naples , and florence .
you are not to suppose that i desired perfection , either of mind or person . i longed only for what suited me -- for the antipodes of the creole : and i longed vainly .
" yet i could not live alone ; so i tried the companionship of mistresses .
she had two successors : an italian , giacinta , and a german , clara ; both considered singularly handsome .
what was their beauty to me in a few weeks ?
giacinta was unprincipled and violent : i tired of her in three months .
but , jane , i see by your face you are not forming a very favourable opinion of me just now . you think me an unfeeling , loose - principled rake : do n't you ? "
i now hate the recollection of the time i passed with celine , giacinta , and clara . "
" now , jane , why do n't you say ' well , sir ? ' i have not done .
last january , rid of all mistresses -- in a harsh , bitter frame of mind , the result of a useless , roving , lonely life -- corroded with disappointment , sourly disposed against all men , and especially against all womankind ( for i began to regard the notion of an intellectual , faithful , loving woman as a mere dream ) , recalled by business , i came back to england .
" on a frosty winter afternoon , i rode in sight of thornfield hall . abhorred spot ! i expected no peace -- no pleasure there .
childish and slender creature ! it seemed as if a linnet had hopped to my foot and proposed to bear me on its tiny wing .
" when once i had pressed the frail shoulder , something new -- a fresh sap and sense -- stole into my frame .
i heard you come home that night , jane , though probably you were not aware that i thought of you or watched for you .
the next day i observed you -- myself unseen -- for half - an- hour , while you played with adele in the gallery .
it was a snowy day , i recollect , and you could not go out of doors . i was in my room ; the door was ajar : i could both listen and watch .
when at last she left you , you lapsed at once into deep reverie : you betook yourself slowly to pace the gallery .
the voice of mrs . fairfax , speaking to a servant in the hall , wakened you : and how curiously you smiled to and at yourself , janet !
you ran downstairs and demanded of mrs . fairfax some occupation : the weekly house accounts to make up , or something of that sort , i think it was . i was vexed with you for getting out of my sight .
" impatiently i waited for evening , when i might summon you to my presence . an unusual -- to me -- a perfectly new character i suspected was yours : i desired to search it deeper and know it better .
you entered the room with a look and air at once shy and independent : you were quaintly dressed -- much as you are now .
i made you talk : ere long i found you full of strange contrasts .
yet , for a long time , i treated you distantly , and sought your company rarely .
i permitted myself the delight of being kind to you ; kindness stirred emotion soon : your face became soft in expression , your tones gentle ; i liked my name pronounced by your lips in a grateful happy accent .
" do n't talk any more of those days , sir , " i interrupted , furtively dashing away some tears from my eyes ; his language was torture to me ; for i knew what i must do -- and do soon -- and all these reminiscences , and these revelations of his feelings only made my work more difficult .
" no , jane , " he returned : " what necessity is there to dwell on the past , when the present is so much surer -- the future so much brighter ? "
i shuddered to hear the infatuated assertion .
" you see now how the case stands -- do you not ? " he continued .
" after a youth and manhood passed half in unutterable misery and half in dreary solitude , i have for the first time found what i can truly love -- i have found you .
you are my sympathy -- my better self -- my good angel . i am bound to you with a strong attachment .
then i should have asked you to accept my pledge of fidelity and to give me yours . jane -- give it me now . "
a pause .
" why are you silent , jane ? "
i was experiencing an ordeal : a hand of fiery iron grasped my vitals .
terrible moment : full of struggle , blackness , burning !
not a human being that ever lived could wish to be loved better than i was loved ; and him who thus loved me i absolutely worshipped : and i must renounce love and idol . one drear word comprised my intolerable duty--"depart ! "
" jane , you understand what i want of you ? just this promise--'i will be yours , mr . rochester . ' "
" mr . rochester , i will _ not _ be yours . "
another long silence .
" i do . "
" jane " ( bending towards and embracing me ) , " do you mean it now ? "
" i do . "
" and now ? " softly kissing my forehead and cheek .
" i do , " extricating myself from restraint rapidly and completely .
a wild look raised his brows -- crossed his features : he rose ; but he forebore yet .
i laid my hand on the back of a chair for support : i shook , i feared -- but i resolved .
" one instant , jane .
give one glance to my horrible life when you are gone . all happiness will be torn away with you .
what then is left ?
for a wife i have but the maniac upstairs : as well might you refer me to some corpse in yonder churchyard .
what shall i do , jane ? where turn for a companion and for some hope ? "
" do as i do : trust in god and yourself . believe in heaven . hope to meet again there . "
" then you will not yield ? "
" no . "
" then you condemn me to live wretched and to die accursed ? "
his voice rose .
" i advise you to live sinless , and i wish you to die tranquil . "
" then you snatch love and innocence from me ? you fling me back on lust for a passion -- vice for an occupation ? "
" mr . rochester , i no more assign this fate to you than i grasp at it for myself .
we were born to strive and endure -- you as well as i : do so . you will forget me before i forget you . "
" you make me a liar by such language : you sully my honour .
i declared i could not change : you tell me to my face i shall change soon . and what a distortion in your judgment , what a perversity in your ideas , is proved by your conduct !
is it better to drive a fellow - creature to despair than to transgress a mere human law , no man being injured by the breach ? for you have neither relatives nor acquaintances whom you need fear to offend by living with me ? "
this was true : and while he spoke my very conscience and reason turned traitors against me , and charged me with crime in resisting him .
who in the world cares for _ you _ ? or who will be injured by what you do ? "
still indomitable was the reply--"_i _ care for myself . the more solitary , the more friendless , the more unsustained i am , the more i will respect myself .
i will keep the law given by god ; sanctioned by man . i will hold to the principles received by me when i was sane , and not mad -- as i am now .
laws and principles are not for the times when there is no temptation : they are for such moments as this , when body and soul rise in mutiny against their rigour ; stringent are they ; inviolate they shall be .
they have a worth -- so i have always believed ; and if i can not believe it now , it is because i am insane -- quite insane : with my veins running fire , and my heart beating faster than i can count its throbs .
mr . rochester , reading my countenance , saw i had done so .
" never , " said he , as he ground his teeth , " never was anything at once so frail and so indomitable .
oh ! come , jane , come ! "
as he said this , he released me from his clutch , and only looked at me .
" you are going , jane ? "
" i am going , sir . "
" you are leaving me ? "
" yes . "
" you will not come ? you will not be my comforter , my rescuer ?
my deep love , my wild woe , my frantic prayer , are all nothing to you ? "
what unutterable pathos was in his voice ! how hard it was to reiterate firmly , " i am going . "
" jane ! "
" mr . rochester ! "
" withdraw , then,--i consent ; but remember , you leave me here in anguish .
go up to your own room ; think over all i have said , and , jane , cast a glance on my sufferings -- think of me . "
he turned away ; he threw himself on his face on the sofa .
" god bless you , my dear master ! " i said . " god keep you from harm and wrong -- direct you , solace you -- reward you well for your past kindness to me . "
up the blood rushed to his face ; forth flashed the fire from his eyes ; erect he sprang ; he held his arms out ; but i evaded the embrace , and at once quitted the room .
i was transported in thought to the scenes of childhood : i dreamt i lay in the red - room at gateshead ; that the night was dark , and my mind impressed with strange fears . the light that long ago had struck me into syncope , recalled in this vision , seemed glidingly to mount the wall , and tremblingly to pause in the centre of the obscured ceiling .
i lifted up my head to look : the roof resolved to clouds , high and dim ; the gleam was such as the moon imparts to vapours she is about to sever .
she broke forth as never moon yet burst from cloud : a hand first penetrated the sable folds and waved them away ; then , not a moon , but a white human form shone in the azure , inclining a glorious brow earthward .
it gazed and gazed on me . it spoke to my spirit : immeasurably distant was the tone , yet so near , it whispered in my heart--
" my daughter , flee temptation . "
" mother , i will . "
so i answered after i had waked from the trance - like dream .
it was yet night , but july nights are short : soon after midnight , dawn comes .
i left that ; it was not mine : it was the visionary bride 's who had melted in air .
i thought of this .
i opened the door , passed out , shut it softly . dim dawn glimmered in the yard .
i skirted fields , and hedges , and lanes till after sunrise . i believe it was a lovely summer morning : i know my shoes , which i had put on when i left the house , were soon wet with dew . but i looked neither to rising sun , nor smiling sky , nor wakening nature .
as yet my flight , i was sure , was undiscovered . i could go back and be his comforter -- his pride ; his redeemer from misery , perhaps from ruin .
birds began singing in brake and copse : birds were faithful to their mates ; birds were emblems of love .
in the midst of my pain of heart and frantic effort of principle , i abhorred myself .
i was hateful in my own eyes . still i could not turn , nor retrace one step .
i stood up and lifted my hand ; it stopped .
i asked where it was going : the driver named a place a long way off , and where i was sure mr . rochester had no connections .
i asked for what sum he would take me there ; he said thirty shillings ; i answered i had but twenty ; well , he would try to make it do .
gentle reader , may you never feel what i then felt !
may your eyes never shed such stormy , scalding , heart - wrung tears as poured from mine .
may you never appeal to heaven in prayers so hopeless and so agonised as in that hour left my lips ; for never may you , like me , dread to be the instrument of evil to what you wholly love .
chapter xxviii
two days are passed .
whitcross is no town , nor even a hamlet ; it is but a stone pillar set up where four roads meet : whitewashed , i suppose , to be more obvious at a distance and in darkness .
i might be questioned : i could give no answer but what would sound incredible and excite suspicion .
i have no relative but the universal mother , nature : i will seek her breast and ask repose .
some time passed before i felt tranquil even here : i had a vague dread that wild cattle might be near , or that some sportsman or poacher might discover me .
if a gust of wind swept the waste , i looked up , fearing it was the rush of a bull ; if a plover whistled , i imagined it a man . finding my apprehensions unfounded , however , and calmed by the deep silence that reigned as evening declined at nightfall , i took confidence .
as yet i had not thought ; i had only listened , watched , dreaded ; now i regained the faculty of reflection .
what was i to do ?
where to go ?
i touched the heath : it was dry , and yet warm with the heat of the summer day .
nature seemed to me benign and good ; i thought she loved me , outcast as i was ; and i , who from man could anticipate only mistrust , rejection , insult , clung to her with filial fondness .
to - night , at least , i would be her guest , as i was her child : my mother would lodge me without money and without price .
i had one morsel of bread yet : the remnant of a roll i had bought in a town we passed through at noon with a stray penny -- my last coin . i saw ripe bilberries gleaming here and there , like jet beads in the heath : i gathered a handful and ate them with the bread .
my hunger , sharp before , was , if not satisfied , appeased by this hermit 's meal . i said my evening prayers at its conclusion , and then chose my couch .
i folded my shawl double , and spread it over me for a coverlet ; a low , mossy swell was my pillow . thus lodged , i was not , at least -- at the commencement of the night , cold .
my rest might have been blissful enough , only a sad heart broke it . it plained of its gaping wounds , its inward bleeding , its riven chords .
worn out with this torture of thought , i rose to my knees . night was come , and her planets were risen : a safe , still night : too serene for the companionship of fear .
we know that god is everywhere ; but certainly we feel his presence most when his works are on the grandest scale spread before us ; and it is in the unclouded night - sky , where his worlds wheel their silent course , that we read clearest his infinitude , his omnipotence , his omnipresence .
mr . rochester was safe ; he was god 's , and by god would he be guarded .
i again nestled to the breast of the hill ; and ere long in sleep forgot sorrow . but next day , want came to me pale and bare .
life , however , was yet in my possession , with all its requirements , and pains , and responsibilities .
the burden must be carried ; the want provided for ; the suffering endured ; the responsibility fulfilled .
i set out .
whitcross regained , i followed a road which led from the sun , now fervent and high . by no other circumstance had i will to decide my choice .
about two o'clock p.m. i entered the village .
at the bottom of its one street there was a little shop with some cakes of bread in the window . i coveted a cake of bread .
with that refreshment i could perhaps regain a degree of energy : without it , it would be difficult to proceed .
the wish to have some strength and some vigour returned to me as soon as i was amongst my fellow - beings . i felt it would be degrading to faint with hunger on the causeway of a hamlet .
had i nothing about me i could offer in exchange for one of these rolls ?
i considered .
i had a small silk handkerchief tied round my throat ; i had my gloves .
i entered the shop : a woman was there .
seeing a respectably - dressed person , a lady as she supposed , she came forward with civility . how could she serve me ?
i only begged permission to sit down a moment , as i was tired .
disappointed in the expectation of a customer , she coolly acceded to my request . she pointed to a seat ; i sank into it .
i felt sorely urged to weep ; but conscious how unseasonable such a manifestation would be , i restrained it .
soon i asked her " if there were any dressmaker or plain - workwoman in the village ? "
" yes ; two or three . quite as many as there was employment for . "
i reflected .
i must do something . what ?
i must apply somewhere . where ?
" did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant was wanted ? "
" nay ; she could n't say . "
" what was the chief trade in this place ? what did most of the people do ? "
" some were farm labourers ; a good deal worked at mr . oliver 's needle - factory , and at the foundry . "
" did mr . oliver employ women ? "
" nay ; it was men 's work . "
she seemed to be tired of my questions : and , indeed , what claim had i to importune her ?
a neighbour or two came in ; my chair was evidently wanted . i took leave .
a pretty little house stood at the top of the lane , with a garden before it , exquisitely neat and brilliantly blooming . i stopped at it .
yet i drew near and knocked .
a mild - looking , cleanly - attired young woman opened the door . in such a voice as might be expected from a hopeless heart and fainting frame -- a voice wretchedly low and faltering -- i asked if a servant was wanted here ?
" no , " said she ; " we do not keep a servant . "
" can you tell me where i could get employment of any kind ? " i continued .
" i am a stranger , without acquaintance in this place . i want some work : no matter what . "
but it was not her business to think for me , or to seek a place for me : besides , in her eyes , how doubtful must have appeared my character , position , tale .
i could not bear to return to the sordid village , where , besides , no prospect of aid was visible .
i drew near houses ; i left them , and came back again , and again i wandered away : always repelled by the consciousness of having no claim to ask -- no right to expect interest in my isolated lot .
meantime , the afternoon advanced , while i thus wandered about like a lost and starving dog .
in crossing a field , i saw the church spire before me : i hastened towards it .
near the churchyard , and in the middle of a garden , stood a well - built though small house , which i had no doubt was the parsonage .
i seemed to have something like a right to seek counsel here .
renewing then my courage , and gathering my feeble remains of strength , i pushed on . i reached the house , and knocked at the kitchen - door .
an old woman opened : i asked was this the parsonage ? " yes . "
" no . "
" would he be in soon ? "
" no , he was gone from home . "
" was there any lady of the house ? "
once more i took off my handkerchief -- once more i thought of the cakes of bread in the little shop .
instinctively i turned my face again to the village ; i found the shop again , and i went in ; and though others were there besides the woman i ventured the request--"would she give me a roll for this handkerchief ? "
she looked at me with evident suspicion : " nay , she never sold stuff i ' that way . "
almost desperate , i asked for half a cake ; she again refused . " how could she tell where i had got the handkerchief ? " she said .
" would she take my gloves ? "
" no ! what could she do with them ? "
reader , it is not pleasant to dwell on these details .
to be sure , what i begged was employment ; but whose business was it to provide me with employment ?
and as to the woman who would not take my handkerchief in exchange for her bread , why , she was right , if the offer appeared to her sinister or the exchange unprofitable .
i stopped and said-- " will you give me a piece of bread ? for i am very hungry . "
towards morning it rained ; the whole of the following day was wet .
do not ask me , reader , to give a minute account of that day ; as before , i sought work ; as before , i was repulsed ; as before , i starved ; but once did food pass my lips . at the door of a cottage i saw a little girl about to throw a mess of cold porridge into a pig trough . " will you give me that ? " i asked .
" mother ! " she exclaimed , " there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge . "
" well lass , " replied a voice within , " give it her if she 's a beggar . t ' pig does n't want it . "
the girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand , and i devoured it ravenously .
as the wet twilight deepened , i stopped in a solitary bridle - path , which i had been pursuing an hour or more .
" my strength is quite failing me , " i said in a soliloquy . " i feel i can not go much farther . shall i be an outcast again this night ? while the rain descends so , must i lay my head on the cold , drenched ground ?
why do i struggle to retain a valueless life ?
oh , providence ! sustain me a little longer ! aid!--direct me ! "
my glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty landscape . i saw i had strayed far from the village : it was quite out of sight .
the very cultivation surrounding it had disappeared . i had , by cross - ways and by- paths , once more drawn near the tract of moorland ; and now , only a few fields , almost as wild and unproductive as the heath from which they were scarcely reclaimed , lay between me and the dusky hill .
to the hill , then , i turned . i reached it .
" is it , then , a bonfire just kindled ? "
and i sank down where i stood , and hid my face against the ground .
i lay still a while : the night - wind swept over the hill and over me , and died moaning in the distance ; the rain fell fast , wetting me afresh to the skin .
i rose ere long .
the light was yet there , shining dim but constant through the rain .
i tried to walk again : i dragged my exhausted limbs slowly towards it .
this light was my forlorn hope : i must gain it . having crossed the marsh , i saw a trace of white over the moor .
my star vanished as i drew near : some obstacle had intervened between me and it .
entering the gate and passing the shrubs , the silhouette of a house rose to view , black , low , and rather long ; but the guiding light shone nowhere . all was obscurity .
were the inmates retired to rest ? i feared it must be so .
the candle , whose ray had been my beacon , burnt on the table ; and by its light an elderly woman , somewhat rough - looking , but scrupulously clean , like all about her , was knitting a stocking .
i noticed these objects cursorily only -- in them there was nothing extraordinary .
they could not be the daughters of the elderly person at the table ; for she looked like a rustic , and they were all delicacy and cultivation .
" listen , diana , " said one of the absorbed students ; " franz and old daniel are together in the night - time , and franz is telling a dream from which he has awakened in terror -- listen ! "
whether it were greek or german i could not tell .
" that is strong , " she said , when she had finished : " i relish it . "
good ! good ! " she exclaimed , while her dark and deep eye sparkled .
both were again silent .
" is there ony country where they talk i ' that way ? " asked the old woman , looking up from her knitting .
" yes , hannah -- a far larger country than england , where they talk in no other way . "
" we could probably tell something of what they said , but not all -- for we are not as clever as you think us , hannah . we do n't speak german , and we can not read it without a dictionary to help us . "
" and what good does it do you ? "
" varry like : but give ower studying ; ye've done enough for to - night . "
" i think we have : at least i 'm tired . mary , are you ? "
" mortally : after all , it 's tough work fagging away at a language with no master but a lexicon . "
" it is , especially such a language as this crabbed but glorious deutsch .
i wonder when st . john will come home . "
" surely he will not be long now : it is just ten ( looking at a little gold watch she drew from her girdle ) .
it rains fast , hannah : will you have the goodness to look at the fire in the parlour ? "
she wiped her eyes with her apron : the two girls , grave before , looked sad now .
" you say he never mentioned us ? " inquired one of the ladies .
ah , childer ! that 's t ' last o ' t ' old stock -- for ye and mr . st . john is like of different soart to them ' at 's gone ; for all your mother wor mich i ' your way , and a'most as book - learned . she wor the pictur ' o ' ye , mary : diana is more like your father . "
both were fair complexioned and slenderly made ; both possessed faces full of distinction and intelligence .
the clock struck ten .
and she proceeded to prepare the meal .
the ladies rose ; they seemed about to withdraw to the parlour .
hannah opened .
" may i speak to your mistresses ? " i said .
" you had better tell me what you have to say to them .
" i am a stranger . "
" what is your business here at this hour ? "
" i want a night 's shelter in an out - house or anywhere , and a morsel of bread to eat . "
distrust , the very feeling i dreaded , appeared in hannah 's face .
" do let me speak to your mistresses . "
" no , not i. what can they do for you ?
you should not be roving about now ; it looks very ill . "
" but where shall i go if you drive me away ?
what shall i do ? "
" oh , i 'll warrant you know where to go and what to do .
here is a penny ; now go-- "
" a penny can not feed me , and i have no strength to go farther .
do n't shut the door:--oh , do n't , for god 's sake ! "
" i must ; the rain is driving in-- "
" tell the young ladies . let me see them-- "
move off . "
" but i must die if i am turned away . "
" not you .
i 'm fear'd you have some ill plans agate , that bring you about folk 's houses at this time o ' night .
here the honest but inflexible servant clapped the door to and bolted it within .
a pang of exquisite suffering -- a throe of true despair -- rent and heaved my heart .
worn out , indeed , i was ; not another step could i stir . i sank on the wet doorstep : i groaned -- i wrung my hands -- i wept in utter anguish .
oh , this spectre of death ! oh , this last hour , approaching in such horror !
alas , this isolation -- this banishment from my kind !
" i can but die , " i said , " and i believe in god . let me try to wait his will in silence . "
" all men must die , " said a voice quite close at hand ; " but all are not condemned to meet a lingering and premature doom , such as yours would be if you perished here of want . "
" who or what speaks ? " i asked , terrified at the unexpected sound , and incapable now of deriving from any occurrence a hope of aid .
a form was near -- what form , the pitch - dark night and my enfeebled vision prevented me from distinguishing .
with a loud long knock , the new - comer appealed to the door .
" is it you , mr . st . john ? " cried hannah .
" yes -- yes ; open quickly . "
" well , how wet and cold you must be , such a wild night as it is !
get up ! for shame ! move off , i say ! "
i was near , and listened to both you and her . i think this is a peculiar case -- i must at least examine into it .
young woman , rise , and pass before me into the house . "
with difficulty i obeyed him . presently i stood within that clean , bright kitchen -- on the very hearth -- trembling , sickening ; conscious of an aspect in the last degree ghastly , wild , and weather - beaten .
the two ladies , their brother , mr . st . john , the old servant , were all gazing at me .
" st . john , who is it ? " i heard one ask .
" i can not tell : i found her at the door , " was the reply .
" she does look white , " said hannah .
and indeed my head swam : i dropped , but a chair received me .
i still possessed my senses , though just now i could not speak .
" perhaps a little water would restore her . hannah , fetch some .
but she is worn to nothing . how very thin , and how very bloodless ! "
" a mere spectre ! "
" is she ill , or only famished ? "
" famished , i think .
hannah , is that milk ? give it me , and a piece of bread . "
" yes -- try , " repeated mary gently ; and mary 's hand removed my sodden bonnet and lifted my head .
i tasted what they offered me : feebly at first , eagerly soon .
" not too much at first -- restrain her , " said the brother ; " she has had enough . " and he withdrew the cup of milk and the plate of bread .
" a little more , st . john -- look at the avidity in her eyes . "
" no more at present , sister . try if she can speak now -- ask her her name . "
anxious as ever to avoid discovery , i had before resolved to assume an _ alias _ .
" and where do you live ? where are your friends ? "
i was silent .
" can we send for any one you know ? "
i shook my head .
" what account can you give of yourself ? "
i began once more to know myself ; and when mr . st . john demanded an account -- which at present i was far too weak to render -- i said after a brief pause--
" sir , i can give you no details to - night . "
" but what , then , " said he , " do you expect me to do for you ? "
diana took the word--
" do you mean , " she asked , " that we have now given you what aid you require ? and that we may dismiss you to the moor and the rainy night ? "
i looked at her . she had , i thought , a remarkable countenance , instinct both with power and goodness .
i took sudden courage . answering her compassionate gaze with a smile , i said-
all three surveyed me , and all three were silent .
" hannah , " said mr . st . john , at last , " let her sit there at present , and ask her no questions ; in ten minutes more , give her the remainder of that milk and bread .
mary and diana , let us go into the parlour and talk the matter over . "
a kind of pleasant stupor was stealing over me as i sat by the genial fire . in an undertone she gave some directions to hannah .
ere long , with the servant 's aid , i contrived to mount a staircase ; my dripping clothes were removed ; soon a warm , dry bed received me .
chapter xxix
the recollection of about three days and nights succeeding this is very dim in my mind . i can recall some sensations felt in that interval ; but few thoughts framed , and no actions performed .
diana and mary appeared in the chamber once or twice a day . they would whisper sentences of this sort at my bedside--
" it is very well we took her in . "
" yes ; she would certainly have been found dead at the door in the morning had she been left out all night .
i wonder what she has gone through ? "
mr . st . john came but once : he looked at me , and said my state of lethargy was the result of reaction from excessive and protracted fatigue .
" that is hardly likely , " was the reply . " you will find she is some young lady who has had a misunderstanding with her friends , and has probably injudiciously left them .
we may , perhaps , succeed in restoring her to them , if she is not obstinate : but i trace lines of force in her face which make me sceptical of her tractability . " he stood considering me some minutes ; then added , " she looks sensible , but not at all handsome . "
" she is so ill , st . john . "
" ill or well , she would always be plain . the grace and harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those features . "
on the third day i was better ; on the fourth , i could speak , move , rise in bed , and turn .
i wished to rise ; but what could i put on ?
only my damp and bemired apparel ; in which i had slept on the ground and fallen in the marsh .
on a chair by the bedside were all my own things , clean and dry .
my very shoes and stockings were purified and rendered presentable .
it was full of the fragrance of new bread and the warmth of a generous fire . hannah was baking .
prejudices , it is well known , are most difficult to eradicate from the heart whose soil has never been loosened or fertilised by education : they grow there , firm as weeds among stones .
hannah had been cold and stiff , indeed , at the first : latterly she had begun to relent a little ; and when she saw me come in tidy and well - dressed , she even smiled .
" what , you have got up ! " she said . " you are better , then . you may sit you down in my chair on the hearthstone , if you will . "
she pointed to the rocking - chair : i took it .
" did you ever go a - begging afore you came here ? "
" you are mistaken in supposing me a beggar . i am no beggar ; any more than yourself or your young ladies . "
after a pause she said , " i dunnut understand that : you 've like no house , nor no brass , i guess ? "
" are you book - learned ? " she inquired presently .
" yes , very . "
" but you 've never been to a boarding - school ? "
" i was at a boarding - school eight years . "
she opened her eyes wide .
" whatever can not ye keep yourself for , then ? "
" i have kept myself ; and , i trust , shall keep myself again .
" mak ' 'em into pies . "
" give them to me and i 'll pick them . "
" nay ; i dunnut want ye to do nought . "
" but i must do something . let me have them . "
" ye've not been used to sarvant 's wark , i see by your hands , " she remarked . " happen ye've been a dressmaker ? "
" some calls it marsh end , and some calls it moor house . "
" and the gentleman who lives here is called mr . st . john ? "
" that village a few miles off ?
" aye . "
i remembered the answer of the old housekeeper at the parsonage , when i had asked to see the clergyman .
" this , then , was his father 's residence ? "
" aye ; old mr . rivers lived here , and his father , and grandfather , and gurt ( great ) grandfather afore him . "
" the name , then , of that gentleman , is mr . st . john rivers ? "
" aye ; st . john is like his kirstened name . "
" and his sisters are called diana and mary rivers ? "
" yes . "
" their father is dead ? "
" dead three weeks sin ' of a stroke . "
" they have no mother ? "
" the mistress has been dead this mony a year . "
" have you lived with the family long ? "
" i 've lived here thirty year .
i nursed them all three . "
" that proves you must have been an honest and faithful servant . i will say so much for you , though you have had the incivility to call me a beggar . "
she again regarded me with a surprised stare .
" i believe , " she said , " i was quite mista'en in my thoughts of you : but there is so mony cheats goes about , you mun forgie me . "
" and though , " i continued , rather severely , " you wished to turn me from the door , on a night when you should not have shut out a dog . "
" well , it was hard : but what can a body do ?
i thought more o ' th ' childer nor of mysel : poor things ! they 've like nobody to tak ' care on 'em but me . i 'm like to look sharpish . "
i maintained a grave silence for some minutes .
" you munnut think too hardly of me , " she again remarked .
" that will do -- i forgive you now . shake hands . "
she put her floury and horny hand into mine ; another and heartier smile illumined her rough face , and from that moment we were friends .
hannah was evidently fond of talking . while i picked the fruit , and she made the paste for the pies , she proceeded to give me sundry details about her deceased master and mistress , and " the childer , " as she called the young people .
old mr . rivers , she said , was a plain man enough , but a gentleman , and of as ancient a family as could be found .
having finished my task of gooseberry picking , i asked where the two ladies and their brother were now .
" gone over to morton for a walk ; but they would be back in half - an - hour to tea . "
they returned within the time hannah had allotted them : they entered by the kitchen door .
" you should have waited for my leave to descend , " she said . " you still look very pale -- and so thin !
diana had a voice toned , to my ear , like the cooing of a dove . she possessed eyes whose gaze i delighted to encounter .
mary 's countenance was equally intelligent -- her features equally pretty ; but her expression was more reserved , and her manners , though gentle , more distant .
diana looked and spoke with a certain authority : she had a will , evidently .
it was my nature to feel pleasure in yielding to an authority supported like hers , and to bend , where my conscience and self - respect permitted , to an active will .
" and what business have you here ? " she continued .
" it is not your place .
mary and i sit in the kitchen sometimes , because at home we like to be free , even to license -- but you are a visitor , and must go into the parlour . "
" i am very well here . "
" not at all , with hannah bustling about and covering you with flour . "
" besides , the fire is too hot for you , " interposed mary .
" to be sure , " added her sister .
she closed the door , leaving me solus with mr . st . john , who sat opposite , a book or newspaper in his hand .
i examined first , the parlour , and then its occupant .
the parlour was rather a small room , very plainly furnished , yet comfortable , because clean and neat .
a few strange , antique portraits of the men and women of other days decorated the stained walls ; a cupboard with glass doors contained some books and an ancient set of china .
he was young -- perhaps from twenty- eight to thirty -- tall , slender ; his face riveted the eye ; it was like a greek face , very pure in outline : quite a straight , classic nose ; quite an athenian mouth and chin .
it is seldom , indeed , an english face comes so near the antique models as did his .
he might well be a little shocked at the irregularity of my lineaments , his own being so harmonious .
his eyes were large and blue , with brown lashes ; his high forehead , colourless as ivory , was partially streaked over by careless locks of fair hair .
this is a gentle delineation , is it not , reader ?
quiescent as he now sat , there was something about his nostril , his mouth , his brow , which , to my perceptions , indicated elements within either restless , or hard , or eager .
he did not speak to me one word , nor even direct to me one glance , till his sisters returned .
" eat that now , " she said : " you must be hungry . hannah says you have had nothing but some gruel since breakfast . "
i did not refuse it , for my appetite was awakened and keen .
" you are very hungry , " he said .
" i am , sir . "
it is my way -- it always was my way , by instinct -- ever to meet the brief with brevity , the direct with plainness .
now you may eat , though still not immoderately . "
" i trust i shall not eat long at your expense , sir , " was my very clumsily- contrived , unpolished answer .
" no , " he said coolly : " when you have indicated to us the residence of your friends , we can write to them , and you may be restored to home . "
" do you mean to say , " he asked , " that you are completely isolated from every connection ? "
" a most singular position at your age ! "
here i saw his glance directed to my hands , which were folded on the table before me .
i wondered what he sought there : his words soon explained the quest .
" you have never been married ? you are a spinster ? "
diana laughed .
" why , she ca n't be above seventeen or eighteen years old , st . john , " said she .
" i am near nineteen : but i am not married . no . "
i felt a burning glow mount to my face ; for bitter and agitating recollections were awakened by the allusion to marriage .
" where did you last reside ? " he now asked .
" you are too inquisitive , st . john , " murmured mary in a low voice ; but he leaned over the table and required an answer by a second firm and piercing look .
first , then , tell me what you have been accustomed to do , and what you _ can _ do . "
i had now swallowed my tea . i was mightily refreshed by the beverage ; as much so as a giant with wine : it gave new tone to my unstrung nerves , and enabled me to address this penetrating young judge steadily .
" i am an orphan , the daughter of a clergyman .
my parents died before i could know them .
" i have heard of mr . brocklehurst , and i have seen the school . "
" i left lowood nearly a year since to become a private governess .
mr . rivers , whom nothing seemed to escape , noticed it at once .
" you said your name was jane elliott ? " he observed .
" your real name you will not give ? "
" no : i fear discovery above all things ; and whatever disclosure would lead to it , i avoid . "
" you are quite right , i am sure , " said diana .
" now do , brother , let her be at peace a while . "
but when st . john had mused a few moments he recommenced as imperturbably and with as much acumen as ever .
" indeed you _ shall _ stay here , " said diana , putting her white hand on my head .
" you _ shall _ , " repeated mary , in the tone of undemonstrative sincerity which seemed natural to her .
i feel more inclination to put you in the way of keeping yourself , and shall endeavour to do so ; but observe , my sphere is narrow .
i am but the incumbent of a poor country parish : my aid must be of the humblest sort . and if you are inclined to despise the day of small things , seek some more efficient succour than such as i can offer . "
" she has already said that she is willing to do anything honest she can do , " answered diana for me ; " and you know , st . john , she has no choice of helpers : she is forced to put up with such crusty people as you . "
" right , " said mr . st . john , quite coolly . " if such is your spirit , i promise to aid you , in my own time and way . "
chapter xxx
the more i knew of the inmates of moor house , the better i liked them .
there was a reviving pleasure in this intercourse , of a kind now tasted by me for the first time -- the pleasure arising from perfect congeniality of tastes , sentiments , and principles .
i liked to read what they liked to read : what they enjoyed , delighted me ; what they approved , i reverenced .
if in our trio there was a superior and a leader , it was diana . physically , she far excelled me : she was handsome ; she was vigorous . in her animal spirits there was an affluence of life and certainty of flow , such as excited my wonder , while it baffled my comprehension .
diana offered to teach me german .
mary would sit and watch me by the hour together : then she would take lessons ; and a docile , intelligent , assiduous pupil she made .
thus occupied , and mutually entertained , days passed like hours , and weeks like days .
sometimes , when the day was very unfavourable , his sisters would expostulate . he would then say , with a peculiar smile , more solemn than cheerful--
but besides his frequent absences , there was another barrier to friendship with him : he seemed of a reserved , an abstracted , and even of a brooding nature .
zealous in his ministerial labours , blameless in his life and habits , he yet did not appear to enjoy that mental serenity , that inward content , which should be the reward of every sincere christian and practical philanthropist .
i think , moreover , that nature was not to him that treasury of delight it was to his sisters .
incommunicative as he was , some time elapsed before i had an opportunity of gauging his mind .
i first got an idea of its calibre when i heard him preach in his own church at morton . i wish i could describe that sermon : but it is past my power .
i can not even render faithfully the effect it produced on me .
this grew to force -- compressed , condensed , controlled . the heart was thrilled , the mind astonished , by the power of the preacher : neither were softened .
meantime a month was gone .
" yes ; i wish to know whether you have heard of any service i can offer myself to undertake ? "
" and they will go in three days now ? " i said .
i was obliged to recall him to a theme which was of necessity one of close and anxious interest to me .
" what is the employment you had in view , mr . rivers ? i hope this delay will not have increased the difficulty of securing it . "
" oh , no ; since it is an employment which depends only on me to give , and you to accept . "
he again paused : there seemed a reluctance to continue .
st . john said these words as he pronounced his sermons , with a quiet , deep voice ; with an unflushed cheek , and a coruscating radiance of glance .
" well ? " i said , as he again paused--"proceed . "
the conclusions drawn from this scrutiny he partially expressed in his succeeding observations .
" do explain , " i urged , when he halted once more .
" i will ; and you shall hear how poor the proposal is,--how trivial -- how cramping .
i shall not stay long at morton , now that my father is dead , and that i am my own master .
morton , when i came to it two years ago , had no school : the children of the poor were excluded from every hope of progress .
i established one for boys : i mean now to open a second school for girls .
i have hired a building for the purpose , with a cottage of two rooms attached to it for the mistress 's house .
will you be this mistress ? "
" i thank you for the proposal , mr . rivers , and i accept it with all my heart . "
" but you comprehend me ? " he said .
" it is a village school : your scholars will be only poor girls -- cottagers ' children -- at the best , farmers ' daughters .
knitting , sewing , reading , writing , ciphering , will be all you will have to teach .
what will you do with your accomplishments ? what , with the largest portion of your mind -- sentiments -- tastes ? "
" save them till they are wanted . they will keep . "
" you know what you undertake , then ? "
" i do . "
" i will go to my house to - morrow , and open the school , if you like , next week . "
" very well : so be it . "
he rose and walked through the room . standing still , he again looked at me . he shook his head .
" you will not stay at morton long : no , no ! "
" why ?
what is your reason for saying so ? "
" i am not ambitious . "
he started at the word " ambitious . "
he repeated , " no .
what made you think of ambition ?
i know i am : but how did you find it out ? "
" i was speaking of myself . "
" well , if you are not ambitious , you are-- " he paused .
" what ? "
" i was going to say , impassioned : but perhaps you would have misunderstood the word , and been displeased .
i mean , that human affections and sympathies have a most powerful hold on you .
well , propensities and principles must be reconciled by some means . "
he left the room .
in this brief hour i had learnt more of him than in the whole previous month : yet still he puzzled me .
diana and mary rivers became more sad and silent as the day approached for leaving their brother and their home .
" he will sacrifice all to his long - framed resolves , " she said : " natural affection and feelings more potent still .
st . john looks quiet , jane ; but he hides a fever in his vitals .
you would think him gentle , yet in some things he is inexorable as death ; and the worst of it is , my conscience will hardly permit me to dissuade him from his severe decision : certainly , i can not for a moment blame him for it .
mary bent her head low over her work .
" we are now without father : we shall soon be without home and brother , " she murmured .
at that moment a little accident supervened , which seemed decreed by fate purposely to prove the truth of the adage , that " misfortunes never come singly , " and to add to their distresses the vexing one of the slip between the cup and the lip .
st . john passed the window reading a letter . he entered .
" our uncle john is dead , " said he .
both the sisters seemed struck : not shocked or appalled ; the tidings appeared in their eyes rather momentous than afflicting .
" dead ? " repeated diana .
she riveted a searching gaze on her brother 's face .
" and what then ? " she demanded , in a low voice .
" what then , die ? " he replied , maintaining a marble immobility of feature .
why -- nothing .
read . "
he threw the letter into her lap .
" amen ! we can yet live , " said diana at last .
" at any rate , it makes us no worse off than we were before , " remarked mary .
" only it forces rather strongly on the mind the picture of what _ might have been _ , " said mr . rivers , " and contrasts it somewhat too vividly with what _ is _ . "
he folded the letter , locked it in his desk , and again went out .
for some minutes no one spoke . diana then turned to me .
he was my mother 's brother . my father and he quarrelled long ago .
it was by his advice that my father risked most of his property in the speculation that ruined him .
mutual recrimination passed between them : they parted in anger , and were never reconciled .
my uncle engaged afterwards in more prosperous undertakings : it appears he realised a fortune of twenty thousand pounds .
he was never married , and had no near kindred but ourselves and one other person , not more closely related than we .
mary and i would have esteemed ourselves rich with a thousand pounds each ; and to st . john such a sum would have been valuable , for the good it would have enabled him to do . "
this explanation given , the subject was dropped , and no further reference made to it by either mr . rivers or his sisters .
the next day i left marsh end for morton . the day after , diana and mary quitted it for distant b- .
in a week , mr . rivers and hannah repaired to the parsonage : and so the old grange was abandoned .
chapter xxxi
it is evening . i have dismissed , with the fee of an orange , the little orphan who serves me as a handmaid . i am sitting alone on the hearth .
this morning , the village school opened . i had twenty scholars . but three of the number can read : none write or cipher . several knit , and a few sew a little .
i must not forget that these coarsely - clad little peasants are of flesh and blood as good as the scions of gentlest genealogy ; and that the germs of native excellence , refinement , intelligence , kind feeling , are as likely to exist in their hearts as in those of the best - born .
my duty will be to develop these germs : surely i shall find some happiness in discharging that office .
was i very gleeful , settled , content , during the hours i passed in yonder bare , humble schoolroom this morning and afternoon ?
not to deceive myself , i must reply -- no : i felt desolate to a degree .
in a few months , it is possible , the happiness of seeing progress , and a change for the better in my scholars may substitute gratification for disgust .
yes ; i feel now that i was right when i adhered to principle and law , and scorned and crushed the insane promptings of a frenzied moment .
god directed me to a correct choice : i thank his providence for the guidance !
the birds were singing their last strains-- " the air was mild , the dew was balm . "
at this thought , i turned my face aside from the lovely sky of eve and lonely vale of morton -- i say _ lonely _ , for in that bend of it visible to me there was no building apparent save the church and the parsonage , half - hid in trees , and , quite at the extremity , the roof of vale hall , where the rich mr . oliver and his daughter lived .
a dog -- old carlo , mr . rivers ' pointer , as i saw in a moment -- was pushing the gate with his nose , and st . john himself leant upon it with folded arms ; his brow knit , his gaze , grave almost to displeasure , fixed on me .
i asked him to come in .
" have you found your first day 's work harder than you expected ? " he asked .
" oh , no !
on the contrary , i think in time i shall get on with my scholars very well . "
" but perhaps your accommodations -- your cottage -- your furniture -- have disappointed your expectations ?
they are , in truth , scanty enough ; but-- " i interrupted--
" but you feel solitude an oppression ? the little house there behind you is dark and empty . "
" very well ; i hope you feel the content you express : at any rate , your good sense will tell you that it is too soon yet to yield to the vacillating fears of lot 's wife .
" it is what i mean to do , " i answered .
st . john continued--
" a year ago i was myself intensely miserable , because i thought i had made a mistake in entering the ministry : its uniform duties wearied me to death .
god had an errand for me ; to bear which afar , to deliver it well , skill and strength , courage and eloquence , the best qualifications of soldier , statesman , and orator , were all needed : for these all centre in the good missionary .
my father , indeed , imposed the determination , but since his death , i have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with ; some affairs settled , a successor for morton provided , an entanglement or two of the feelings broken through or cut asunder -- a last conflict with human weakness , in which i know i shall overcome , because i have vowed that i _ will _ overcome -- and i leave europe for the east . "
" good evening , mr . rivers . and good evening , old carlo .
your dog is quicker to recognise his friends than you are , sir ; he pricked his ears and wagged his tail when i was at the bottom of the field , and you have your back towards me now . "
it was true .
he turned at last , with measured deliberation . a vision , as it seemed to me , had risen at his side .
what did st . john rivers think of this earthly angel ?
" a lovely evening , but late for you to be out alone , " he said , as he crushed the snowy heads of the closed flowers with his foot .
" oh , i only came home from s- " ( she mentioned the name of a large town some twenty miles distant ) " this afternoon .
papa told me you had opened your school , and that the new mistress was come ; and so i put on my bonnet after tea , and ran up the valley to see her : this is she ? " pointing to me .
" it is , " said st . john .
" i hope i shall . i have many inducements to do so . "
" did you find your scholars as attentive as you expected ? "
" quite . "
" do you like your house ? "
" very much . "
" have i furnished it nicely ? "
" very nicely , indeed . "
" and made a good choice of an attendant for you in alice wood ? "
mr . rivers , i have been _ so _ gay during my stay at s- .
last night , or rather this morning , i was dancing till two o'clock .
the ---th regiment are stationed there since the riots ; and the officers are the most agreeable men in the world : they put all our young knife - grinders and scissor merchants to shame . "
he lifted his gaze , too , from the daisies , and turned it on her . an unsmiling , a searching , a meaning gaze it was .
she answered it with a second laugh , and laughter well became her youth , her roses , her dimples , her bright eyes .
as he stood , mute and grave , she again fell to caressing carlo .
" poor carlo loves me , " said she . " _ he _ is not stern and distant to his friends ; and if he could speak , he would not be silent . "
he is alone this evening , and not very well : will you return with me and visit him ? "
" it is not a seasonable hour to intrude on mr . oliver , " answered st . john .
" not a seasonable hour ! but i declare it is . it is just the hour when papa most wants company : when the works are closed and he has no business to occupy him .
now , mr . rivers , _ do _ come . why are you so very shy , and so very sombre ? "
she filled up the hiatus his silence left by a reply of her own .
i am sure i pity you . do come and see papa . "
" not to - night , miss rosamond , not to - night . "
mr . st . john spoke almost like an automaton : himself only knew the effort it cost him thus to refuse .
good evening ! "
" good evening ! " he repeated , in a voice low and hollow as an echo .
she turned , but in a moment returned .
" are you well ? " she asked .
this spectacle of another 's suffering and sacrifice rapt my thoughts from exclusive meditation on my own .
diana rivers had designated her brother " inexorable as death . " she had not exaggerated .
chapter xxxii
i continued the labours of the village - school as actively and faithfully as i could .
it was truly hard work at first . some time elapsed before , with all my efforts , i could comprehend my scholars and their nature .
many showed themselves obliging , and amiable too ; and i discovered amongst them not a few examples of natural politeness , and innate self - respect , as well as of excellent capacity , that won both my goodwill and my admiration .
these soon took a pleasure in doing their work well , in keeping their persons neat , in learning their tasks regularly , in acquiring quiet and orderly manners .
the rapidity of their progress , in some instances , was even surprising ; and an honest and happy pride i took in it : besides , i began personally to like some of the best girls ; and they liked me .
i had amongst my scholars several farmers ' daughters : young women grown , almost .
i found estimable characters amongst them -- characters desirous of information and disposed for improvement -- with whom i passed many a pleasant evening hour in their own homes .
their parents then ( the farmer and his wife ) loaded me with attentions .
i felt i became a favourite in the neighbourhood .
whenever i went out , i heard on all sides cordial salutations , and was welcomed with friendly smiles .
by nine o'clock the next morning i was punctually opening the school ; tranquil , settled , prepared for the steady duties of the day .
rosamond oliver kept her word in coming to visit me .
it is not despair of success that keeps me dumb . if i offered my heart , i believe you would accept it .
but that heart is already laid on a sacred altar : the fire is arranged round it . it will soon be no more than a sacrifice consumed . "
st . john , no doubt , would have given the world to follow , recall , retain her , when she thus left him ; but he would not give one chance of heaven , nor relinquish , for the elysium of her love , one hope of the true , eternal paradise . besides , he could not bind all that he had in his nature -- the rover , the aspirant , the poet , the priest -- in the limits of a single passion .
he could not -- he would not -- renounce his wild field of mission warfare for the parlours and the peace of vale hall .
i learnt so much from himself in an inroad i once , despite his reserve , had the daring to make on his confidence .
a very different sort of mind was hers from that , for instance , of the sisters of st . john .
she had taken an amiable caprice to me . she said i was like mr . rivers , only , certainly , she allowed , " not one - tenth so handsome , though i was a nice neat little soul enough , but he was an angel . "
i was , however , good , clever , composed , and firm , like him . i was a _ lusus naturae _ , she affirmed , as a village schoolmistress : she was sure my previous history , if known , would make a delightful romance .
i drew better than her master in the first school in s- .
would i sketch a portrait of her , to show to papa ? "
" with pleasure , " i replied ; and i felt a thrill of artist - delight at the idea of copying from so perfect and radiant a model .
she had then on a dark - blue silk dress ; her arms and her neck were bare ; her only ornament was her chestnut tresses , which waved over her shoulders with all the wild grace of natural curls .
i took a sheet of fine card - board , and drew a careful outline . i promised myself the pleasure of colouring it ; and , as it was getting late then , i told her she must come and sit another day .
he appeared a taciturn , and perhaps a proud personage ; but he was very kind to me .
the sketch of rosamond 's portrait pleased him highly : he said i must make a finished picture of it . he insisted , too , on my coming the next day to spend the evening at vale hall .
i went .
i found it a large , handsome residence , showing abundant evidences of wealth in the proprietor .
" indeed , " cried rosamond , " she is clever enough to be a governess in a high family , papa . "
i thought i would far rather be where i am than in any high family in the land .
it appeared , then , that her father would throw no obstacle in the way of rosamond 's union with st . john . mr . oliver evidently regarded the young clergyman 's good birth , old name , and sacred profession as sufficient compensation for the want of fortune .
i was absorbed in the execution of these nice details , when , after one rapid tap , my door unclosed , admitting st . john rivers .
" i am come to see how you are spending your holiday , " he said .
" not , i hope , in thought ? no , that is well : while you draw you will not feel lonely .
alas ! the readers of our era are less favoured .
i will not pause either to accuse or repine .
powerful angels , safe in heaven ! they smile when sordid souls triumph , and feeble ones weep over their destruction .
poetry destroyed ? genius banished ?
no ! mediocrity , no : do not let envy prompt you to the thought .
no ; they not only live , but reign and redeem : and without their divine influence spread everywhere , you would be in hell -- the hell of your own meanness .
i am sure it would benefit him to talk a little about this sweet rosamond , whom he thinks he ought not to marry : i will make him talk . "
i 'll try if i can not discover the secret spring of your confidence , and find an aperture in that marble breast through which i can shed one drop of the balm of sympathy . "
" is this portrait like ? " i asked bluntly .
" like ! like whom ?
i did not observe it closely . "
" you did , mr . rivers . "
he almost started at my sudden and strange abruptness : he looked at me astonished .
i continued , " you observed it closely and distinctly ; but i have no objection to your looking at it again , " and i rose and placed it in his hand .
" a well - executed picture , " he said ; " very soft , clear colouring ; very graceful and correct drawing . "
mastering some hesitation , he answered , " miss oliver , i presume . "
" of course .
" it is like ! " he murmured ; " the eye is well managed : the colour , light , expression , are perfect . it smiles ! "
" would it comfort , or would it wound you to have a similar painting ?
" that i should like to have it is certain : whether it would be judicious or wise is another question . "
with this persuasion i now answered--
reserved people often really need the frank discussion of their sentiments and griefs more than the expansive .
" she likes you , i am sure , " said i , as i stood behind his chair , " and her father respects you .
moreover , she is a sweet girl -- rather thoughtless ; but you would have sufficient thought for both yourself and her .
you ought to marry her . "
" _ does _ she like me ? " he asked .
she is mine -- i am hers -- this present life and passing world suffice to me .
hush ! say nothing -- my heart is full of delight -- my senses are entranced -- let the time i marked pass in peace . "
i humoured him : the watch ticked on : he breathed fast and low : i stood silent .
amidst this hush the quartet sped ; he replaced the watch , laid the picture down , rose , and stood on the hearth .
" now , " said he , " that little space was given to delirium and delusion . i rested my temples on the breast of temptation , and put my neck voluntarily under her yoke of flowers . i tasted her cup .
i gazed at him in wonder .
" strange indeed ! " i could not help ejaculating .
" while something in me , " he went on , " is acutely sensible to her charms , something else is as deeply impressed with her defects : they are such that she could sympathise in nothing i aspired to -- co - operate in nothing i undertook .
rosamond a sufferer , a labourer , a female apostle ? rosamond a missionary 's wife ? no ! "
" but you need not be a missionary . you might relinquish that scheme . "
must i relinquish that ? it is dearer than the blood in my veins . it is what i have to look forward to , and to live for . "
after a considerable pause , i said--"and miss oliver ? are her disappointment and sorrow of no interest to you ? "
" miss oliver is ever surrounded by suitors and flatterers : in less than a month , my image will be effaced from her heart . she will forget me ; and will marry , probably , some one who will make her far happier than i should do . "
" you tremble and become flushed whenever miss oliver enters the schoolroom . "
again the surprised expression crossed his face .
" you are original , " said he , " and not timid .
know me to be what i am -- a cold hard man . "
i smiled incredulously .
i honour endurance , perseverance , industry , talent ; because these are the means by which men achieve great ends and mount to lofty eminence .
i watch your career with interest , because i consider you a specimen of a diligent , orderly , energetic woman : not because i deeply compassionate what you have gone through , or what you still suffer . "
" you would describe yourself as a mere pagan philosopher , " i said .
" no . there is this difference between me and deistic philosophers : i believe ; and i believe the gospel .
having said this , he took his hat , which lay on the table beside my palette . once more he looked at the portrait .
" she _ is _ lovely , " he murmured . " she is well named the rose of the world , indeed ! "
" and may i not paint one like it for you ? "
" _ cui bono _ ? no . " he drew over the picture the sheet of thin paper on which i was accustomed to rest my hand in painting , to prevent the cardboard from being sullied .
" what is the matter ? " i asked .
" nothing in the world , " was the reply ; and , replacing the paper , i saw him dexterously tear a narrow slip from the margin . it disappeared in his glove ; and , with one hasty nod and " good - afternoon , " he vanished .
chapter xxxiii
i heard a noise : the wind , i thought , shook the door . no ; it was st . john rivers , who , lifting the latch , came in out of the frozen hurricane -- the howling darkness -- and stood before me : the cloak that covered his tall figure all white as a glacier .
i was almost in consternation , so little had i expected any guest from the blocked - up vale that night .
" any ill news ? " i demanded . " has anything happened ? "
" no . how very easily alarmed you are ! " he answered , removing his cloak and hanging it up against the door , towards which he again coolly pushed the mat which his entrance had deranged . he stamped the snow from his boots .
" i shall sully the purity of your floor , " said he , " but you must excuse me for once . " then he approached the fire .
" one drift took me up to the waist ; happily the snow is quite soft yet . "
" but why are you come ? " i could not forbear saying .
he sat down .
it struck me that his hand looked wasted like his face .
" not at all , " said he : " i care for myself when necessary . i am well now .
what do you see amiss in me ? "
i was silenced .
he still slowly moved his finger over his upper lip , and still his eye dwelt dreamily on the glowing grate ; thinking it urgent to say something , i asked him presently if he felt any cold draught from the door , which was behind him .
" no , no ! " he responded shortly and somewhat testily .
" well , " i reflected , " if you wo n't talk , you may be still ; i 'll let you alone now , and return to my book . "
so i snuffed the candle and resumed the perusal of " marmion . "
" have you heard from diana and mary lately ? "
" not since the letter i showed you a week ago . "
" there has not been any change made about your own arrangements ?
you will not be summoned to leave england sooner than you expected ? "
" i fear not , indeed : such chance is too good to befall me . "
baffled so far , i changed my ground . i bethought myself to talk about the school and my scholars .
" indeed ! "
" mr . oliver pays for two . "
" does he ? "
" he means to give the whole school a treat at christmas . "
" i know . "
" was it your suggestion ? "
" no . "
" whose , then ? "
" his daughter 's , i think . "
" it is like her : she is so good - natured . "
" yes . "
it aroused him ; he uncrossed his legs , sat erect , turned to me .
" leave your book a moment , and come a little nearer the fire , " he said .
wondering , and of my wonder finding no end , i complied .
before commencing , it is but fair to warn you that the story will sound somewhat hackneyed in your ears ; but stale details often regain a degree of freshness when they pass through new lips .
for the rest , whether trite or novel , it is short .
" twenty years ago , a poor curate -- never mind his name at this moment -- fell in love with a rich man 's daughter ; she fell in love with him , and married him , against the advice of all her friends , who consequently disowned her immediately after the wedding . before two years passed , the rash pair were both dead , and laid quietly side by side under one slab .
( i have seen their grave ; it formed part of the pavement of a huge churchyard surrounding the grim , soot - black old cathedral of an overgrown manufacturing town in ---shire . )
you start -- did you hear a noise ?
i daresay it is only a rat scrambling along the rafters of the adjoining schoolroom : it was a barn before i had it repaired and altered , and barns are generally haunted by rats .
" mr . rivers ! " i interrupted .
how and where is he ?
what is he doing ?
is he well ? "
" i am ignorant of all concerning mr . rochester : the letter never mentions him but to narrate the fraudulent and illegal attempt i have adverted to .
you should rather ask the name of the governess -- the nature of the event which requires her appearance . "
" did no one go to thornfield hall , then ? did no one see mr . rochester ? "
" i suppose not . "
" but they wrote to him ? "
" mr . briggs intimates that the answer to his application was not from mr . rochester , but from a lady : it is signed ' alice fairfax . ' "
i dared not answer the question .
oh , my poor master -- once almost my husband -- whom i had often called " my dear edward ! "
" he must have been a bad man , " observed mr . rivers .
" you do n't know him -- don't pronounce an opinion upon him , " i said , with warmth .
he got up , held it close to my eyes : and i read , traced in indian ink , in my own handwriting , the words " jane eyre"--the work doubtless of some moment of abstraction .
" briggs wrote to me of a jane eyre : " he said , " the advertisements demanded a jane eyre : i knew a jane elliott.--i confess i had my suspicions , but it was only yesterday afternoon they were at once resolved into certainty .
you own the name and renounce the _ alias _ ? "
" yes -- yes ; but where is mr . briggs ?
he perhaps knows more of mr . rochester than you do . "
" briggs is in london . i should doubt his knowing anything at all about mr . rochester ; it is not in mr . rochester he is interested .
" well , what did he want ? "
" merely to tell you that your uncle , mr . eyre of madeira , is dead ; that he has left you all his property , and that you are now rich -- merely that -- nothing more . "
" i!--rich ? "
" yes , you , rich -- quite an heiress . "
silence succeeded .
your fortune is vested in the english funds ; briggs has the will and the necessary documents . "
here was a new card turned up !
it is a fine thing , reader , to be lifted in a moment from indigence to wealth -- a very fine thing ; but not a matter one can comprehend , or consequently enjoy , all at once .
besides , the words legacy , bequest , go side by side with the words , death , funeral .
my uncle i had heard was dead -- my only relative ; ever since being made aware of his existence , i had cherished the hope of one day seeing him : now , i never should .
and then this money came only to me : not to me and a rejoicing family , but to my isolated self .
it was a grand boon doubtless ; and independence would be glorious -- yes , i felt that -- that thought swelled my heart .
perhaps now you will ask how much you are worth ? "
" how much am i worth ? "
" oh , a trifle ! nothing of course to speak of -- twenty thousand pounds , i think they say -- but what is that ? "
" twenty thousand pounds ? "
here was a new stunner -- i had been calculating on four or five thousand . this news actually took my breath for a moment : mr . st . john , whom i had never heard laugh before , laughed now .
" well , " said he , " if you had committed a murder , and i had told you your crime was discovered , you could scarcely look more aghast . "
" it is a large sum -- don't you think there is a mistake ? "
" no mistake at all . " " perhaps you have read the figures wrong -- it may be two thousand ! "
" it is written in letters , not figures,--twenty thousand . "
mr . rivers rose now and put his cloak on .
good - night . "
he was lifting the latch : a sudden thought occurred to me .
" stop one minute ! " i cried .
" well ? "
" oh ! i am a clergyman , " he said ; " and the clergy are often appealed to about odd matters . " again the latch rattled .
" it is a very strange piece of business , " i added ; " i must know more about it . "
" another time . "
" no ; to - night!--to - night ! " and as he turned from the door , i placed myself between it and him .
he looked rather embarrassed .
" you certainly shall not go till you have told me all , " i said .
" i would rather diana or mary informed you . "
of course these objections wrought my eagerness to a climax : gratified it must be , and that without delay ; and i told him so .
" but i apprised you that i was a hard man , " said he , " difficult to persuade . "
" and i am a hard woman,--impossible to put off . "
" and then , " he pursued , " i am cold : no fervour infects me . "
" whereas i am hot , and fire dissolves ice .
the blaze there has thawed all the snow from your cloak ; by the same token , it has streamed on to my floor , and made it like a trampled street .
as you hope ever to be forgiven , mr . rivers , the high crime and misdemeanour of spoiling a sanded kitchen , tell me what i wish to know . "
your name is jane eyre ? "
" of course : that was all settled before . "
" you are not , perhaps , aware that i am your namesake?--that i was christened st . john eyre rivers ? "
" no , indeed ! i remember now seeing the letter e. comprised in your initials written in books you have at different times lent me ; but i never asked for what name it stood . but what then ? surely-- "
" my mother 's name was eyre ; she had two brothers ; one a clergyman , who married miss jane reed , of gateshead ; the other , john eyre , esq . , merchant , late of funchal , madeira .
he wrote again a few weeks since , to intimate that the heiress was lost , and asking if we knew anything of her . a name casually written on a slip of paper has enabled me to find her out .
again he was going , but i set my back against the door .
i paused -- he stood before me , hat in hand , looking composed enough .
" your mother was my father 's sister ? "
" yes . "
" my aunt , consequently ? "
he bowed .
" my uncle john was your uncle john ? you , diana , and mary are his sister 's children , as i am his brother 's child ? "
" undeniably . "
" we are cousins ; yes . "
i now clapped my hands in sudden joy -- my pulse bounded , my veins thrilled .
" oh , i am glad!--i am glad ! " i exclaimed .
st . john smiled .
" did i not say you neglected essential points to pursue trifles ? " he asked .
" you were serious when i told you you had got a fortune ; and now , for a matter of no moment , you are excited . "
" what can you mean ?
it may be of no moment to you ; you have sisters and do n't care for a cousin ; but i had nobody ; and now three relations,--or two , if you do n't choose to be counted,--are born into my world full - grown .
i say again , i am glad ! "
were we not four ?
twenty thousand pounds shared equally would be five thousand each , justice -- enough and to spare : justice would be done,--mutual happiness secured .
" write to diana and mary to - morrow , " i said , " and tell them to come home directly .
diana said they would both consider themselves rich with a thousand pounds , so with five thousand they will do very well . "
" nonsense ! and what sort of an effect will the bequest have on you ?
will it keep you in england , induce you to marry miss oliver , and settle down like an ordinary mortal ? "
" you wander : your head becomes confused .
i have been too abrupt in communicating the news ; it has excited you beyond your strength . "
" mr . rivers ! you quite put me out of patience : i am rational enough ; it is you who misunderstand , or rather who affect to misunderstand . "
" perhaps , if you explained yourself a little more fully , i should comprehend better . "
" explain ! what is there to explain ?
" to you , you mean . "
" oh ! if all you doubt is my sincerity , i am easy : you see the justice of the case ? "
" with me , " said i , " it is fully as much a matter of feeling as of conscience : i must indulge my feelings ; i so seldom have had an opportunity of doing so .
" and you , " i interrupted , " can not at all imagine the craving i have for fraternal and sisterly love .
" jane , i will be your brother -- my sisters will be your sisters -- without stipulating for this sacrifice of your just rights . "
" brother ? yes ; at the distance of a thousand leagues ! sisters ? yes ; slaving amongst strangers ! i , wealthy -- gorged with gold i never earned and do not merit ! you , penniless ! famous equality and fraternisation ! close union ! intimate attachment ! "
" nonsense , again ! marry ! i do n't want to marry , and never shall marry . "
" that is saying too much : such hazardous affirmations are a proof of the excitement under which you labour . "
" it is not saying too much : i know what i feel , and how averse are my inclinations to the bare thought of marriage .
no one would take me for love ; and i will not be regarded in the light of a mere money speculation .
and i do not want a stranger -- unsympathising , alien , different from me ; i want my kindred : those with whom i have full fellow- feeling .
" thank you : that contents me for to - night .
now you had better go ; for if you stay longer , you will perhaps irritate me afresh by some mistrustful scruple . "
" and the school , miss eyre ? it must now be shut up , i suppose ? "
" no . i will retain my post of mistress till you get a substitute . "
he smiled approbation : we shook hands , and he took leave .
the judges chosen were mr . oliver and an able lawyer : both coincided in my opinion : i carried my point .
the instruments of transfer were drawn out : st . john , diana , mary , and i , each became possessed of a competency .
chapter xxxiv
it was near christmas by the time all was settled : the season of general holiday approached . i now closed morton school , taking care that the parting should not be barren on my side .
" doubtless . "
" and you have only toiled a few months ! would not a life devoted to the task of regenerating your race be well spent ? "
" to be active : as active as i can . and first i must beg you to set hannah at liberty , and get somebody else to wait on you . "
" do you want her ? "
" yes , to go with me to moor house .
diana and mary will be at home in a week , and i want to have everything in order against their arrival . "
" i understand . i thought you were for flying off on some excursion .
it is better so : hannah shall go with you . "
st . john smiled slightly : still he was dissatisfied .
" it is all very well for the present , " said he ; " but seriously , i trust that when the first flush of vivacity is over , you will look a little higher than domestic endearments and household joys . "
" the best things the world has ! "
i interrupted .
" no , jane , no : this world is not the scene of fruition ; do not attempt to make it so : nor of rest ; do not turn slothful . "
" i mean , on the contrary , to be busy . "
i looked at him with surprise .
to what end ? "
" to the end of turning to profit the talents which god has committed to your keeping ; and of which he will surely one day demand a strict account .
jane , i shall watch you closely and anxiously -- i warn you of that .
and try to restrain the disproportionate fervour with which you throw yourself into commonplace home pleasures .
do you hear , jane ? "
" yes ; just as if you were speaking greek .
i feel i have adequate cause to be happy , and i _ will _ be happy .
goodbye ! "
happy at moor house i was , and hard i worked ; and so did hannah : she was charmed to see how jovial i could be amidst the bustle of a house turned topsy - turvy -- how i could brush , and dust , and clean , and cook .
and really , after a day or two of confusion worse confounded , it was delightful by degrees to invoke order from the chaos ourselves had made .
when all was finished , i thought moor house as complete a model of bright modest snugness within , as it was , at this season , a specimen of wintry waste and desert dreariness without . the eventful thursday at length came .
st . john arrived first .
he found me in the kitchen , watching the progress of certain cakes for tea , then baking .
this silence damped me . i thought perhaps the alterations had disturbed some old associations he valued . i inquired whether this was the case : no doubt in a somewhat crest - fallen tone .
how many minutes , for instance , had i devoted to studying the arrangement of this very room?--by - the - bye , could i tell him where such a book was ? "
i showed him the volume on the shelf : he took it down , and withdrawing to his accustomed window recess , he began to read it .
now , i did not like this , reader .
st . john was a good man ; but i began to feel he had spoken truth of himself when he said he was hard and cold .
i saw he was of the material from which nature hews her heroes -- christian and pagan -- her lawgivers , her statesmen , her conquerors : a steadfast bulwark for great interests to rest upon ; but , at the fireside , too often a cold cumbrous column , gloomy and out of place .
" this parlour is not his sphere , " i reflected : " the himalayan ridge or caffre bush , even the plague - cursed guinea coast swamp would suit him better .
" they are coming ! they are coming ! " cried hannah , throwing open the parlour door .
hannah soon had a lantern lit . the vehicle had stopped at the wicket ; the driver opened the door : first one well - known form , then another , stepped out .
in a minute i had my face under their bonnets , in contact first with mary 's soft cheek , then with diana 's flowing curls .
while the driver and hannah brought in the boxes , they demanded st . john . at this moment he advanced from the parlour .
they were delighted with the renovation and decorations of their rooms ; with the new drapery , and fresh carpets , and rich tinted china vases : they expressed their gratification ungrudgingly .
i had the pleasure of feeling that my arrangements met their wishes exactly , and that what i had done added a vivid charm to their joyous return home .
sweet was that evening .
" where does she live , hannah ? "
" tell him i will go . "
" i 'm sure , sir , you had better not . it 's the worst road to travel after dark that can be : there 's no track at all over the bog .
you had better send word , sir , that you will be there in the morning . "
i am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience .
st . john did not rebuke our vivacity ; but he escaped from it : he was seldom in the house ; his parish was large , the population scattered , and he found daily business in visiting the sick and poor in its different districts .
one morning at breakfast , diana , after looking a little pensive for some minutes , asked him , " if his plans were yet unchanged . "
" unchanged and unchangeable , " was the reply .
and he proceeded to inform us that his departure from england was now definitively fixed for the ensuing year .
" rosamond oliver , " said he , " is about to be married to mr . granby , one of the best connected and most estimable residents in s- , grandson and heir to sir frederic granby : i had the intelligence from her father yesterday . "
" the match must have been got up hastily , " said diana : " they can not have known each other long . "
" but two months : they met in october at the county ball at s- .
when i remembered how far i had once been admitted to his confidence , i could hardly comprehend his present frigidity .
such being the case , i felt not a little surprised when he raised his head suddenly from the desk over which he was stooping , and said--
" you see , jane , the battle is fought and the victory won . "
the event of the conflict is decisive : my way is now clear ; i thank god for it ! "
so saying , he returned to his papers and his silence .
as our mutual happiness ( _ i.e. _ , diana 's , mary 's , and mine ) settled into a quieter character , and we resumed our usual habits and regular studies , st . john stayed more at home : he sat with us in the same room , sometimes for hours together .
his sisters were gone to morton in my stead : i sat reading schiller ; he , deciphering his crabbed oriental scrolls .
" jane , what are you doing ? "
" learning german . "
" i want you to give up german and learn hindostanee . "
" you are not in earnest ? "
would i do him this favour ? i should not , perhaps , have to make the sacrifice long , as it wanted now barely three months to his departure .
st . john was not a man to be lightly refused : you felt that every impression made on him , either for pain or pleasure , was deep - graved and permanent . i consented .
when diana and mary returned , the former found her scholar transferred from her to her brother : she laughed , and both she and mary agreed that st . john should never have persuaded them to such a step .
he answered quietly-- " i know it . "
i found him a very patient , very forbearing , and yet an exacting master : he expected me to do a great deal ; and when i fulfilled his expectations , he , in his own way , fully testified his approbation .
i was so fully aware that only serious moods and occupations were acceptable , that in his presence every effort to sustain or follow any other became vain : i fell under a freezing spell .
when he said " go , " i went ; " come , " i came ; " do this , " i did it . but i did not love my servitude : i wished , many a time , he had continued to neglect me .
one evening when , at bedtime , his sisters and i stood round him , bidding him good - night , he kissed each of them , as was his custom ; and , as was equally his custom , he gave me his hand .
diana , who chanced to be in a frolicsome humour ( _ she _ was not painfully controlled by his will ; for hers , in another way , was as strong ) , exclaimed--
" st . john ! you used to call jane your third sister , but you do n't treat her as such : you should kiss her too . "
she pushed me towards him .
i thought diana very provoking , and felt uncomfortably confused ; and while i was thus thinking and feeling , st . john bent his head ; his greek face was brought to a level with mine , his eyes questioned my eyes piercingly -- he kissed me .
when given , he viewed me to learn the result ; it was not striking : i am sure i did not blush ; perhaps i might have turned a little pale , for i felt as if this kiss were a seal affixed to my fetters .
he never omitted the ceremony afterwards , and the gravity and quiescence with which i underwent it , seemed to invest it for him with a certain charm .
perhaps you think i had forgotten mr . rochester , reader , amidst these changes of place and fortune .
not for a moment .
i was astonished when a fortnight passed without reply ; but when two months wore away , and day after day the post arrived and brought nothing for me , i fell a prey to the keenest anxiety .
i wrote again : there was a chance of my first letter having missed . renewed hope followed renewed effort : it shone like the former for some weeks , then , like it , it faded , flickered : not a line , not a word reached me .
when half a year wasted in vain expectancy , my hope died out , and then i felt dark indeed .
a fine spring shone round me , which i could not enjoy .
summer approached ; diana tried to cheer me : she said i looked ill , and wished to accompany me to the sea - side .
the bitter check had wrung from me some tears ; and now , as i sat poring over the crabbed characters and flourishing tropes of an indian scribe , my eyes filled again .
st . john called me to his side to read ; in attempting to do this my voice failed me : words were lost in sobs .
he and i were the only occupants of the parlour : diana was practising her music in the drawing - room , mary was gardening -- it was a very fine may day , clear , sunny , and breezy .
my companion expressed no surprise at this emotion , nor did he question me as to its cause ; he only said--
" we will wait a few minutes , jane , till you are more composed . "
having stifled my sobs , wiped my eyes , and muttered something about not being very well that morning , i resumed my task , and succeeded in completing it .
st . john put away my books and his , locked his desk , and said-- " now , jane , you shall take a walk ; and with me . "
" i will call diana and mary . "
" no ; i want only one companion this morning , and that must be you .
put on your things ; go out by the kitchen - door : take the road towards the head of marsh glen : i will join you in a moment . "
i know no medium : i never in my life have known any medium in my dealings with positive , hard characters , antagonistic to my own , between absolute submission and determined revolt .
i took a seat : st . john stood near me .
he looked up the pass and down the hollow ; his glance wandered away with the stream , and returned to traverse the unclouded heaven which coloured it : he removed his hat , let the breeze stir his hair and kiss his brow .
he seemed in communion with the genius of the haunt : with his eye he bade farewell to something .
strange words of a strange love !
an austere patriot 's passion for his fatherland !
" jane , i go in six weeks ; i have taken my berth in an east indiaman which sails on the 20th of june . "
" god will protect you ; for you have undertaken his work , " i answered .
" yes , " said he , " there is my glory and joy .
i am the servant of an infallible master .
i am not going out under human guidance , subject to the defective laws and erring control of my feeble fellow - worms : my king , my lawgiver , my captain , is the all - perfect .
it seems strange to me that all round me do not burn to enlist under the same banner,--to join in the same enterprise . "
" all have not your powers , and it would be folly for the feeble to wish to march with the strong . "
" those are few in number , and difficult to discover . "
" and what does _ your _ heart say ? " demanded st . john .
" my heart is mute,--my heart is mute , " i answered , struck and thrilled .
" then i must speak for it , " continued the deep , relentless voice .
" jane , come with me to india : come as my helpmeet and fellow - labourer . "
but i was no apostle,--i could not behold the herald,--i could not receive his call .
" oh , st . john ! " i cried , " have some mercy ! "
i appealed to one who , in the discharge of what he believed his duty , knew neither mercy nor remorse .
he continued--
" i am not fit for it : i have no vocation , " i said .
he had calculated on these first objections : he was not irritated by them .
who is fit for it ? or who , that ever was truly called , believed himself worthy of the summons ?
i , for instance , am but dust and ashes . with st . paul , i acknowledge myself the chiefest of sinners ; but i do not suffer this sense of my personal vileness to daunt me .
think like me , jane -- trust like me .
" i do not understand a missionary life : i have never studied missionary labours . "
this i could do in the beginning : soon ( for i know your powers ) you would be as strong and apt as myself , and would not require my help . "
" but my powers -- where are they for this undertaking ? i do not feel them .
" i have an answer for you -- hear it .
i have proved you in that time by sundry tests : and what have i seen and elicited ?
in the calm with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich , i read a mind clear of the vice of demas:--lucre had no undue power over you .
the case is very plain before me .
in leaving england , i should leave a loved but empty land -- mr . rochester is not there ; and if he were , what is , what can that ever be to me ?
is it not , by its noble cares and sublime results , the one best calculated to fill the void left by uptorn affections and demolished hopes ?
i believe i must say , yes -- and yet i shudder . alas !
if i join st . john , i abandon half myself : if i go to india , i go to premature death . and how will the interval between leaving england for india , and india for the grave , be filled ? oh , i know well !
that , too , is very clear to my vision . by straining to satisfy st . john till my sinews ache , i _ shall _ satisfy him -- to the finest central point and farthest outward circle of his expectations .
he will never love me ; but he shall approve me ; i will show him energies he has not yet seen , resources he has never suspected .
yes , i can work as hard as he can , and with as little grudging .
he prizes me as a soldier would a good weapon ; and that is all .
unmarried to him , this would never grieve me ; but can i let him complete his calculations -- coolly put into practice his plans -- go through the wedding ceremony ? can i receive from him the bridal ring , endure all the forms of love ( which i doubt not he would scrupulously observe ) and know that the spirit was quite absent ?
can i bear the consciousness that every endearment he bestows is a sacrifice made on principle ? no : such a martyrdom would be monstrous .
" i am ready to go to india , if i may go free . "
" your answer requires a commentary , " he said ; " it is not clear . "
" you have hitherto been my adopted brother -- i , your adopted sister : let us continue as such : you and i had better not marry . "
he shook his head .
" adopted fraternity will not do in this case .
do you not see it , jane ? consider a moment -- your strong sense will guide you . "
" st . john , " i returned , " i regard you as a brother -- you , me as a sister : so let us continue . "
you have said you will go with me to india : remember -- you have said that . "
" conditionally . "
" well -- well . to the main point -- the departure with me from england , the co - operation with me in my future labours -- you do not object .
you have already as good as put your hand to the plough : you are too consistent to withdraw it .
i , too , do not want a sister : a sister might any day be taken from me . i want a wife : the sole helpmeet i can influence efficiently in life , and retain absolutely till death . "
" you cannot -- you ought not .
" oh ! i will give my heart to god , " i said . " _ you _ do not want it . "
i had silently feared st . john till now , because i had not understood him .
" is she sarcastic , and sarcastic to _ me _ ! " it seemed to say . " what does this signify ? "
" shall i ? "
" st . john ! " i exclaimed , when i had got so far in my meditation .
" well ? " he answered icily .
how can i , a man not yet thirty , take out with me to india a girl of nineteen , unless she be married to me ?
and for the rest , though you have a man 's vigorous brain , you have a woman 's heart and -- it would not do . "
" it would do , " i affirmed with some disdain , " perfectly well .
" it is what i want , " he said , speaking to himself ; " it is just what i want .
and there are obstacles in the way : they must be hewn down .
jane , you would not repent marrying me -- be certain of that ; we _ must _ be married .
i repeat it : there is no other way ; and undoubtedly enough of love would follow upon marriage to render the union right even in your eyes . "
" i scorn the counterfeit sentiment you offer : yes , st . john , and i scorn you when you offer it . "
" i scarcely expected to hear that expression from you , " he said : " i think i have done and uttered nothing to deserve scorn . "
" forgive me the words , st . john ; but it is your own fault that i have been roused to speak so unguardedly .
you have introduced a topic on which our natures are at variance -- a topic we should never discuss : the very name of love is an apple of discord between us .
my dear cousin , abandon your scheme of marriage -- forget it . "
" no , " said he ; " it is a long - cherished scheme , and the only one which can secure my great end : but i shall urge you no further at present .
to - morrow , i leave home for cambridge : i have many friends there to whom i should wish to say farewell .
i shall be absent a fortnight -- take that space of time to consider my offer : and do not forget that if you reject it , it is not me you deny , but god .
tremble lest in that case you should be numbered with those who have denied the faith , and are worse than infidels ! "
he had done . turning from me , he once more " looked to river , looked to hill . "
that night , after he had kissed his sisters , he thought proper to forget even to shake hands with me , but left the room in silence .
i -- who , though i had no love , had much friendship for him -- was hurt by the marked omission : so much hurt that tears started to my eyes .
i have not much pride under such circumstances : i would always rather be happy than dignified ; and i ran after him -- he stood at the foot of the stairs .
" good - night , st . john , " said i.
" good - night , jane , " he replied calmly .
" then shake hands , " i added .
what a cold , loose touch , he impressed on my fingers !
he was deeply displeased by what had occurred that day ; cordiality would not warm , nor tears move him .
no happy reconciliation was to be had with him -- no cheering smile or generous word : but still the christian was patient and placid ; and when i asked him if he forgave me , he answered that he was not in the habit of cherishing the remembrance of vexation ; that he had nothing to forgive , not having been offended .
and with that answer he left me . i would much rather he had knocked me down .
chapter xxxv
not that st . john harboured a spirit of unchristian vindictiveness -- not that he would have injured a hair of my head , if it had been fully in his power to do so .
to me , he was in reality become no longer flesh , but marble ; his eye was a cold , bright , blue gem ; his tongue a speaking instrument -- nothing more .
i felt how -- if i were his wife , this good man , pure as the deep sunless source , could soon kill me , without drawing from my veins a single drop of blood , or receiving on his own crystal conscience the faintest stain of crime . especially i felt this when i made any attempt to propitiate him .
no ruth met my ruth . _ he _ experienced no suffering from estrangement -- no yearning after reconciliation ; and though , more than once , my fast falling tears blistered the page over which we both bent , they produced no more effect on him than if his heart had been really a matter of stone or metal .
" st . john , i am unhappy because you are still angry with me . let us be friends . "
" i hope we are friends , " was the unmoved reply ; while he still watched the rising of the moon , which he had been contemplating as i approached .
" no , st . john , we are not friends as we were .
you know that . " " are we not ? that is wrong . for my part , i wish you no ill and all good . "
" of course , " he said . " your wish is reasonable , and i am far from regarding you as a stranger . "
this , spoken in a cool , tranquil tone , was mortifying and baffling enough .
had i attended to the suggestions of pride and ire , i should immediately have left him ; but something worked within me more strongly than those feelings could .
i deeply venerated my cousin 's talent and principle . his friendship was of value to me : to lose it tried me severely . i would not so soon relinquish the attempt to reconquer it .
" when i go to india , jane , will i leave you ! what ! do you not go to india ? "
" you said i could not unless i married you . "
" and you will not marry me ! you adhere to that resolution ? "
reader , do you know , as i do , what terror those cold people can put into the ice of their questions ?
how much of the fall of the avalanche is in their anger ? of the breaking up of the frozen sea in their displeasure ?
" no . st . john , i will not marry you . i adhere to my resolution . "
" once more , why this refusal ? " he asked .
" formerly , " i answered , " because you did not love me ; now , i reply , because you almost hate me .
if i were to marry you , you would kill me . you are killing me now . "
his lips and cheeks turned white -- quite white .
" _ i should kill you_--_i am killing you _ ?
your words are such as ought not to be used : violent , unfeminine , and untrue .
" now you will indeed hate me , " i said . " it is useless to attempt to conciliate you : i see i have made an eternal enemy of you . "
that bloodless lip quivered to a temporary spasm . i knew the steely ire i had whetted . i was heart - wrung .
most bitterly he smiled -- most decidedly he withdrew his hand from mine .
" and now you recall your promise , and will not go to india at all , i presume ? " said he , after a considerable pause .
" yes , i will , as your assistant , " i answered .
" i before proved to you the absurdity of a single woman of your age proposing to accompany abroad a single man of mine .
i interrupted him . anything like a tangible reproach gave me courage at once .
" keep to common sense , st . john : you are verging on nonsense .
you pretend to be shocked by what i have said . you are not really shocked : for , with your superior mind , you can not be either so dull or so conceited as to misunderstand my meaning .
i say again , i will be your curate , if you like , but never your wife . "
again he turned lividly pale ; but , as before , controlled his passion perfectly . he answered emphatically but calmly--
" a female curate , who is not my wife , would never suit me .
your own fortune will make you independent of the society 's aid ; and thus you may still be spared the dishonour of breaking your promise and deserting the band you engaged to join . "
i replied--
" there is no dishonour , no breach of promise , no desertion in the case . i am not under the slightest obligation to go to india , especially with strangers .
with you i would have ventured much , because i admire , confide in , and , as a sister , i love you ; but i am convinced that , go when and with whom i would , i should not live long in that climate . "
" ah ! you are afraid of yourself , " he said , curling his lip .
" i am .
" i know where your heart turns and to what it clings .
you think of mr . rochester ? "
it was true . i confessed it by silence .
" i must find out what is become of him . "
i had thought i recognised in you one of the chosen . but god sees not as man sees : _ his _ will be done-- "
he opened the gate , passed through it , and strayed away down the glen . he was soon out of sight .
on re - entering the parlour , i found diana standing at the window , looking very thoughtful .
diana was a great deal taller than i : she put her hand on my shoulder , and , stooping , examined my face .
i wish he loved you -- does he , jane ? "
i put her cool hand to my hot forehead ; " no , die , not one whit . "
mary and i had both concluded he wished you to marry him . "
" he does -- he has asked me to be his wife . "
diana clapped her hands . " that is just what we hoped and thought !
and you will marry him , jane , wo n't you ? and then he will stay in england . "
" far from that , diana ; his sole idea in proposing to me is to procure a fitting fellow - labourer in his indian toils . "
" what ! he wishes you to go to india ? "
" yes . "
" madness ! " she exclaimed . " you would not live three months there , i am certain .
you never shall go : you have not consented , have you , jane ? "
" i have refused to marry him-- "
" and have consequently displeased him ? " she suggested .
" deeply : he will never forgive me , i fear : yet i offered to accompany him as his sister . "
" it was frantic folly to do so , jane .
think of the task you undertook -- one of incessant fatigue , where fatigue kills even the strong , and you are weak .
i am astonished you found courage to refuse his hand .
you do not love him then , jane ? "
" not as a husband . "
" yet he is a handsome fellow . "
" and i am so plain , you see , die . we should never suit . "
" plain ! you ?
and again she earnestly conjured me to give up all thoughts of going out with her brother .
" i must indeed , " i said ; " for when just now i repeated the offer of serving him for a deacon , he expressed himself shocked at my want of decency .
" what makes you say he does not love you , jane ? "
" you should hear himself on the subject .
he has again and again explained that it is not himself , but his office he wishes to mate . he has told me i am formed for labour -- not for love : which is true , no doubt .
but , in my opinion , if i am not formed for love , it follows that i am not formed for marriage .
would it not be strange , die , to be chained for life to a man who regarded one but as a useful tool ? "
in that case , my lot would become unspeakably wretched .
he would not want me to love him ; and if i showed the feeling , he would make me sensible that it was a superfluity , unrequired by him , unbecoming in me . i know he would . "
" and yet st . john is a good man , " said diana .
here he comes ! i will leave you , diana . "
and i hastened upstairs as i saw him entering the garden .
but i was forced to meet him again at supper .
for the evening reading before prayers , he selected the twenty - first chapter of revelation .
the succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spoke them : especially as i felt , by the slight , indescribable alteration in sound , that in uttering them , his eye had turned on me .
" he that overcometh shall inherit all things ; and i will be his god , and he shall be my son .
henceforward , i knew what fate st . john feared for me .
" thank you , jane . as i said , i shall return from cambridge in a fortnight : that space , then , is yet left you for reflection .
my master was long - suffering : so will i be .
remember , we are bid to work while it is day -- warned that ' the night cometh when no man shall work . '
he laid his hand on my head as he uttered the last words .
he had spoken earnestly , mildly : his look was not , indeed , that of a lover beholding his mistress , but it was that of a pastor recalling his wandering sheep -- or better , of a guardian angel watching the soul for which he is responsible .
so i think at this hour , when i look back to the crisis through the quiet medium of time : i was unconscious of folly at the instant .
i stood motionless under my hierophant 's touch . my refusals were forgotten -- my fears overcome -- my wrestlings paralysed .
the impossible--_i.e . _ , my marriage with st . john -- was fast becoming the possible . all was changing utterly with a sudden sweep .
" could you decide now ? " asked the missionary .
the inquiry was put in gentle tones : he drew me to him as gently .
oh , that gentleness ! how far more potent is it than force !
" my prayers are heard ! " ejaculated st . john .
i sincerely , deeply , fervently longed to do what was right ; and only that . " show me , show me the path ! " i entreated of heaven .
i was excited more than i had ever been ; and whether what followed was the effect of excitement the reader shall judge .
all the house was still ; for i believe all , except st . john and myself , were now retired to rest .
the one candle was dying out : the room was full of moonlight .
my heart beat fast and thick : i heard its throb .
suddenly it stood still to an inexpressible feeling that thrilled it through , and passed at once to my head and extremities .
they rose expectant : eye and ear waited while the flesh quivered on my bones .
" what have you heard ? what do you see ? " asked st . john .
i saw nothing , but i heard a voice somewhere cry--
" jane ! jane ! jane!"--nothing more .
" o god ! what is it ? " i gasped .
" i am coming ! " i cried . " wait for me !
oh , i will come ! "
i flew to the door and looked into the passage : it was dark .
i ran out into the garden : it was void .
" where are you ? " i exclaimed .
the hills beyond marsh glen sent the answer faintly back--"where are you ? "
i broke from st . john , who had followed , and would have detained me .
it was _ my _ time to assume ascendency . _ my _ powers were in play and in force .
i told him to forbear question or remark ; i desired him to leave me : i must and would be alone .
he obeyed at once .
where there is energy to command well enough , obedience never fails .
chapter xxxvi
the daylight came .
meantime , i heard st . john quit his room .
" you left me too suddenly last night . had you stayed but a little longer , you would have laid your hand on the christian 's cross and the angel 's crown .
i shall expect your clear decision when i return this day fortnight .
meantime , watch and pray that you enter not into temptation : the spirit , i trust , is willing , but the flesh , i see , is weak .
i shall pray for you hourly .
--yours , st . john . "
" my spirit , " i answered mentally , " is willing to do what is right ; and my flesh , i hope , is strong enough to accomplish the will of heaven , when once that will is distinctly known to me .
at any rate , it shall be strong enough to search -- inquire -- to grope an outlet from this cloud of doubt , and find the open day of certainty . "
it was the first of june ; yet the morning was overcast and chilly : rain beat fast on my casement .
it wanted yet two hours of breakfast - time . i filled the interval in walking softly about my room , and pondering the visitation which had given my plans their present bent .
at breakfast i announced to diana and mary that i was going a journey , and should be absent at least four days .
" alone , jane ? " they asked .
" yes ; it was to see or hear news of a friend about whom i had for some time been uneasy . "
i replied , that nothing ailed me save anxiety of mind , which i hoped soon to alleviate .
amidst the silence of those solitary roads and desert hills , i heard it approach from a great distance .
yes , i knew the character of this landscape : i was sure we were near my bourne .
" how far is thornfield hall from here ? " i asked of the ostler .
" just two miles , ma'am , across the fields . "
" my journey is closed , " i thought to myself .
my heart leapt up : i was already on my master 's very lands .
with what feelings i welcomed single trees i knew , and familiar glimpses of meadow and hill between them !
at last the woods rose ; the rookery clustered dark ; a loud cawing broke the morning stillness .
could i but see him!--but a moment !
and if i did -- what then ?
god bless him !
i rave : perhaps at this moment he is watching the sun rise over the pyrenees , or on the tideless sea of the south . "
i had coasted along the lower wall of the orchard -- turned its angle : there was a gate just there , opening into the meadow , between two stone pillars crowned by stone balls .
from behind one pillar i could peep round quietly at the full front of the mansion . i advanced my head with precaution , desirous to ascertain if any bedroom window - blinds were yet drawn up : battlements , windows , long front -- all from this sheltered station were at my command .
hear an illustration , reader .
a lover finds his mistress asleep on a mossy bank ; he wishes to catch a glimpse of her fair face without waking her .
he thought his love slept sweetly : he finds she is stone dead .
i looked with timorous joy towards a stately house : i saw a blackened ruin .
the lawn , the grounds were trodden and waste : the portal yawned void . the front was , as i had once seen it in a dream , but a well - like wall , very high and very fragile - looking , perforated with paneless windows : no roof , no battlements , no chimneys -- all had crashed in .
and there was the silence of death about it : the solitude of a lonesome wild .
no wonder that letters addressed to people here had never received an answer : as well despatch epistles to a vault in a church aisle .
the grim blackness of the stones told by what fate the hall had fallen -- by conflagration : but how kindled ?
what story belonged to this disaster ?
what loss , besides mortar and marble and wood - work had followed upon it ?
had life been wrecked as well as property ?
if so , whose ?
in what land ? under what auspices ? my eye involuntarily wandered to the grey church tower near the gates , and i asked , " is he with damer de rochester , sharing the shelter of his narrow marble house ? "
the host himself brought my breakfast into the parlour . i requested him to shut the door and sit down : i had some questions to ask him .
" you know thornfield hall , of course ? " i managed to say at last .
" yes , ma'am ; i lived there once . "
" did you ? " not in my time , i thought : you are a stranger to me .
" i was the late mr . rochester 's butler , " he added .
the late !
i seem to have received , with full force , the blow i had been trying to evade .
" the late ! " i gasped . " is he dead ? "
" i mean the present gentleman , mr . edward 's father , " he explained .
i breathed again : my blood resumed its flow . fully assured by these words that mr . edward--_my _ mr . rochester ( god bless him , wherever he was!)--was at least alive : was , in short , " the present gentleman . "
" is mr . rochester living at thornfield hall now ? "
i asked , knowing , of course , what the answer would be , but yet desirous of deferring the direct question as to where he really was .
" no , ma'am -- oh , no ! no one is living there .
i suppose you are a stranger in these parts , or you would have heard what happened last autumn,--thornfield hall is quite a ruin : it was burnt down just about harvest - time .
" was it known how it originated ? " i demanded .
" they guessed , ma'am : they guessed . indeed , i should say it was ascertained beyond a doubt .
you are not perhaps aware , " he continued , edging his chair a little nearer the table , and speaking low , " that there was a lady -- a -- a lunatic , kept in the house ? "
" i have heard something of it . "
they said mr . edward had brought her from abroad , and some believed she had been his mistress . but a queer thing happened a year since -- a very queer thing . "
i feared now to hear my own story . i endeavoured to recall him to the main fact .
" and this lady ? "
" this lady , ma'am , " he answered , " turned out to be mr . rochester 's wife ! the discovery was brought about in the strangest way .
there was a young lady , a governess at the hall , that mr . rochester fell in-- "
" but the fire , " i suggested .
" i 'm coming to that , ma'am -- that mr . edward fell in love with .
she was a little small thing , they say , almost like a child .
well , he would marry her . "
was it suspected that this lunatic , mrs . rochester , had any hand in it ? "
" you 've hit it , ma'am : it 's quite certain that it was her , and nobody but her , that set it going .
they say she had nearly burnt her husband in his bed once : but i do n't know about that .
miss adele , a ward he had , was put to school . he broke off acquaintance with all the gentry , and shut himself up like a hermit at the hall . "
" what ! did he not leave england ? "
i knew him from a boy , you see : and for my part , i have often wished that miss eyre had been sunk in the sea before she came to thornfield hall . "
" then mr . rochester was at home when the fire broke out ? "
she was a big woman , and had long black hair : we could see it streaming against the flames as she stood . i witnessed , and several more witnessed , mr . rochester ascend through the sky - light on to the roof ; we heard him call ' bertha ! '
" dead ? "
" dead ! ay , dead as the stones on which her brains and blood were scattered . "
" good god ! "
" and afterwards ? " i urged .
" well , ma'am , afterwards the house was burnt to the ground : there are only some bits of walls standing now . "
" were any other lives lost ? "
" no -- perhaps it would have been better if there had . "
" what do you mean ? "
" poor mr . edward ! " he ejaculated , " i little thought ever to have seen it !
some say it was a just judgment on him for keeping his first marriage secret , and wanting to take another wife while he had one living : but i pity him , for my part . "
" you said he was alive ? " i exclaimed .
" yes , yes : he is alive ; but many think he had better be dead . "
" ay -- ay -- he 's in england ; he ca n't get out of england , i fancy -- he 's a fixture now . "
what agony was this ! and the man seemed resolved to protract it .
" he is stone - blind , " he said at last . " yes , he is stone - blind , is mr . edward . "
i had dreaded worse . i had dreaded he was mad .
i summoned strength to ask what had caused this calamity .
as he came down the great staircase at last , after mrs . rochester had flung herself from the battlements , there was a great crash -- all fell .
" where is he ?
where does he now live ? " " at ferndean , a manor - house on a farm he has , about thirty miles off : quite a desolate spot . "
" who is with him ? "
" old john and his wife : he would have none else . he is quite broken down , they say . "
" have you any sort of conveyance ? "
" we have a chaise , ma'am , a very handsome chaise . "
" let it be got ready instantly ; and if your post - boy can drive me to ferndean before dark this day , i 'll pay both you and him twice the hire you usually demand . "
chapter xxxvii
the manor - house of ferndean was a building of considerable antiquity , moderate size , and no architectural pretensions , deep buried in a wood .
mr . rochester often spoke of it , and sometimes went there .
iron gates between granite pillars showed me where to enter , and passing through them , i found myself at once in the twilight of close - ranked trees .
there was a grass - grown track descending the forest aisle between hoar and knotty shafts and under branched arches .
i followed it , expecting soon to reach the dwelling ; but it stretched on and on , it would far and farther : no sign of habitation or grounds was visible .
i thought i had taken a wrong direction and lost my way . the darkness of natural as well as of sylvan dusk gathered over me .
i proceeded : at last my way opened , the trees thinned a little ; presently i beheld a railing , then the house -- scarce , by this dim light , distinguishable from the trees ; so dank and green were its decaying walls .
the whole looked , as the host of the rochester arms had said , " quite a desolate spot . "
" can there be life here ? " i asked .
dusk as it was , i had recognised him -- it was my master , edward fairfax rochester , and no other .
i stayed my step , almost my breath , and stood to watch him -- to examine him , myself unseen , and alas ! to him invisible .
it was a sudden meeting , and one in which rapture was kept well in check by pain .
i had no difficulty in restraining my voice from exclamation , my step from hasty advance .
and , reader , do you think i feared him in his blind ferocity?--if you do , you little know me .
he descended the one step , and advanced slowly and gropingly towards the grass - plat .
then he paused , as if he knew not which way to turn . he lifted his hand and opened his eyelids ; gazed blank , and with a straining effort , on the sky , and toward the amphitheatre of trees : one saw that all to him was void darkness .
at this moment john approached him from some quarter .
" will you take my arm , sir ? " he said ; " there is a heavy shower coming on : had you not better go in ? "
" let me alone , " was the answer .
john withdrew without having observed me . mr . rochester now tried to walk about : vainly,--all was too uncertain . he groped his way back to the house , and , re - entering it , closed the door .
i now drew near and knocked :
john 's wife opened for me .
" mary , " i said , " how are you ? "
she started as if she had seen a ghost : i calmed her . to her hurried " is it really you , miss , come at this late hour to this lonely place ? " i answered by taking her hand ; and then i followed her into the kitchen , where john now sat by a good fire .
i explained to them , in few words , that i had heard all which had happened since i left thornfield , and that i was come to see mr . rochester .
just at this moment the parlour - bell rang .
" when you go in , " said i , " tell your master that a person wishes to speak to him , but do not give my name . "
" i do n't think he will see you , " she answered ; " he refuses everybody . "
when she returned , i inquired what he had said .
" is that what he rang for ? " i asked .
" yes : he always has candles brought in at dark , though he is blind . "
" give the tray to me ; i will carry it in . "
i took it from her hand : she pointed me out the parlour door .
the tray shook as i held it ; the water spilt from the glass ; my heart struck my ribs loud and fast .
mary opened the door for me , and shut it behind me .
this parlour looked gloomy : a neglected handful of fire burnt low in the grate ; and , leaning over it , with his head supported against the high , old - fashioned mantelpiece , appeared the blind tenant of the room .
his old dog , pilot , lay on one side , removed out of the way , and coiled up as if afraid of being inadvertently trodden upon .
mr . rochester turned mechanically to _ see _ what the commotion was : but as he _ saw _ nothing , he returned and sighed .
" give me the water , mary , " he said .
i approached him with the now only half - filled glass ; pilot followed me , still excited .
" what is the matter ? " he inquired .
" down , pilot ! " i again said .
" this is you , mary , is it not ? "
" mary is in the kitchen , " i answered .
" answer me -- speak again ! " he ordered , imperiously and aloud .
" will you have a little more water , sir ?
i spilt half of what was in the glass , " i said .
" _ who _ is it ? _ what _ is it ? who speaks ? "
" pilot knows me , and john and mary know i am here .
i came only this evening , " i answered .
" great god!--what delusion has come over me ? what sweet madness has seized me ? "
" and where is the speaker ?
is it only a voice ? oh !
whatever -- whoever you are -- be perceptible to the touch or i can not live ! "
he groped ; i arrested his wandering hand , and prisoned it in both mine .
" her very fingers ! " he cried ; " her small , slight fingers !
" is it jane ? _ what _ is it ?
this is her shape -- this is her size-- "
" and this her voice , " i added .
" she is all here : her heart , too . god bless you , sir !
" jane eyre!--jane eyre , " was all he said .
" in truth?--in the flesh ?
my living jane ? "
" my living darling !
" which i never will , sir , from this day . "
i pressed my lips to his once brilliant and now rayless eyes -- i swept his hair from his brow , and kissed that too .
" it is you -- is it , jane ? you are come back to me then ? "
" i am . "
" and you do not lie dead in some ditch under some stream ?
and you are not a pining outcast amongst strangers ? "
" no , sir ! i am an independent woman now . "
" independent ! what do you mean , jane ? "
" my uncle in madeira is dead , and he left me five thousand pounds . "
" ah ! this is practical -- this is real ! " he cried : " i should never dream that .
are you an independent woman ? a rich woman ? "
" if you wo n't let me live with you , i can build a house of my own close up to your door , and you may come and sit in my parlour when you want company of an evening . "
" but as you are rich , jane , you have now , no doubt , friends who will look after you , and not suffer you to devote yourself to a blind lameter like me ? "
" i told you i am independent , sir , as well as rich : i am my own mistress . "
" and you will stay with me ? "
" certainly -- unless you object .
cease to look so melancholy , my dear master ; you shall not be left desolate , so long as i live . "
he replied not : he seemed serious -- abstracted ; he sighed ; he half - opened his lips as if to speak : he closed them again .
" no -- no -- jane ; you must not go .
" well , sir , i will stay with you : i have said so . "
" yes -- but you understand one thing by staying with me ; and i understand another .
i suppose i should now entertain none but fatherly feelings for you : do you think so ? come -- tell me . "
" i will think what you like , sir : i am content to be only your nurse , if you think it better . "
" but you can not always be my nurse , janet : you are young -- you must marry one day . "
" i do n't care about being married . "
" you should care , janet : if i were what i once was , i would try to make you care -- but -- a sightless block ! " he relapsed again into gloom .
" on this arm , i have neither hand nor nails , " he said , drawing the mutilated limb from his breast , and showing it to me . " it is a mere stump -- a ghastly sight ! do n't you think so , jane ? "
" i thought you would be revolted , jane , when you saw my arm , and my cicatrised visage . "
can you tell when there is a good fire ? "
" yes ; with the right eye i see a glow -- a ruddy haze . "
" and you see the candles ? "
" very dimly -- each is a luminous cloud . "
" can you see me ? "
" no , my fairy : but i am only too thankful to hear and feel you . "
" when do you take supper ? "
" i never take supper . "
summoning mary , i soon had the room in more cheerful order : i prepared him , likewise , a comfortable repast .
my spirits were excited , and with pleasure and ease i talked to him during supper , and for a long time after .
delightful consciousness ! it brought to life and light my whole nature : in his presence i thoroughly lived ; and he lived in mine .
blind as he was , smiles played over his face , joy dawned on his forehead : his lineaments softened and warmed .
after supper , he began to ask me many questions , of where i had been , what i had been doing , how i had found him out ; but i gave him only very partial replies : it was too late to enter into particulars that night .
if a moment 's silence broke the conversation , he would turn restless , touch me , then say , " jane . "
" you are altogether a human being , jane ? you are certain of that ? "
" i conscientiously believe so , mr . rochester . "
" yet how , on this dark and doleful evening , could you so suddenly rise on my lone hearth ?
" because i had come in , in mary 's stead , with the tray . "
" and there is enchantment in the very hour i am now spending with you .
who can tell what a dark , dreary , hopeless life i have dragged on for months past ?
doing nothing , expecting nothing ; merging night in day ; feeling but the sensation of cold when i let the fire go out , of hunger when i forgot to eat : and then a ceaseless sorrow , and , at times , a very delirium of desire to behold my jane again . yes : for her restoration i longed , far more than for that of my lost sight .
how can it be that jane is with me , and says she loves me ?
will she not depart as suddenly as she came ?
to - morrow , i fear i shall find her no more . "
i passed my finger over his eyebrows , and remarked that they were scorched , and that i would apply something which would make them grow as broad and black as ever .
" have you a pocket - comb about you , sir ? "
" what for , jane ? "
" just to comb out this shaggy black mane .
" am i hideous , jane ? "
" very , sir : you always were , you know . "
" humph !
" yet i have been with good people ; far better than you : a hundred times better people ; possessed of ideas and views you never entertained in your life : quite more refined and exalted . "
" who the deuce have you been with ? "
" who have you been with , jane ? "
" you mocking changeling -- fairy - born and human - bred ! you make me feel as i have not felt these twelve months .
if saul could have had you for his david , the evil spirit would have been exorcised without the aid of the harp . "
good night . "
" just one word , jane : were there only ladies in the house where you have been ? "
i laughed and made my escape , still laughing as i ran upstairs .
very early the next morning i heard him up and astir , wandering from one room to another .
then : " which room did you put her into ?
was it dry ?
go and ask if she wants anything ; and when she will come down . "
i came down as soon as i thought there was a prospect of breakfast .
entering the room very softly , i had a view of him before he discovered my presence .
it was mournful , indeed , to witness the subjugation of that vigorous spirit to a corporeal infirmity .
i had meant to be gay and careless , but the powerlessness of the strong man touched my heart to the quick : still i accosted him with what vivacity i could .
i had wakened the glow : his features beamed .
" oh , you are indeed there , my skylark ! come to me . you are not gone : not vanished ?
i heard one of your kind an hour ago , singing high over the wood : but its song had no music for me , any more than the rising sun had rays .
all the melody on earth is concentrated in my jane 's tongue to my ear ( i am glad it is not naturally a silent one ) : all the sunshine i can feel is in her presence . "
but i would not be lachrymose : i dashed off the salt drops , and busied myself with preparing breakfast .
most of the morning was spent in the open air .
i led him out of the wet and wild wood into some cheerful fields : i described to him how brilliantly green they were ; how the flowers and hedges looked refreshed ; how sparklingly blue was the sky .
i sought a seat for him in a hidden and lovely spot , a dry stump of a tree ; nor did i refuse to let him , when seated , place me on his knee .
why should i , when both he and i were happier near than apart ?
pilot lay beside us : all was quiet .
he broke out suddenly while clasping me in his arms--
" cruel , cruel deserter !
a pearl necklace i had given you lay untouched in its little casket ; your trunks were left corded and locked as they had been prepared for the bridal tour .
what could my darling do , i asked , left destitute and penniless ?
and what did she do ? let me hear now . "
i should not have left him thus , he said , without any means of making my way : i should have told him my intention . i should have confided in him : he would never have forced me to be his mistress .
i had endured , he was certain , more than i had confessed to him .
of course , st . john rivers ' name came in frequently in the progress of my tale .
" this st . john , then , is your cousin ? "
" yes . "
" you have spoken of him often : do you like him ? "
" st john was only twenty - nine , sir . "
" ' _ jeune encore _ , ' as the french say .
is he a person of low stature , phlegmatic , and plain .
a person whose goodness consists rather in his guiltlessness of vice , than in his prowess in virtue . "
" he is untiringly active . great and exalted deeds are what he lives to perform . "
" but his brain ? that is probably rather soft ?
he means well : but you shrug your shoulders to hear him talk ? "
" he talks little , sir : what he does say is ever to the point .
his brain is first - rate , i should think not impressible , but vigorous . "
" is he an able man , then ? "
" truly able . "
" a thoroughly educated man ? "
" st . john is an accomplished and profound scholar . "
" his manners , i think , you said are not to your taste?--priggish and parsonic ? "
" i never mentioned his manners ; but , unless i had a very bad taste , they must suit it ; they are polished , calm , and gentlemanlike . "
" st . john dresses well . he is a handsome man : tall , fair , with blue eyes , and a grecian profile . "
( aside . ) " damn him!"--(to me . ) " did you like him , jane ? "
" yes , mr . rochester , i liked him : but you asked me that before . "
i would not , therefore , immediately charm the snake .
" perhaps you would rather not sit any longer on my knee , miss eyre ? " was the next somewhat unexpected observation .
" why not , mr . rochester ? "
" the picture you have just drawn is suggestive of a rather too overwhelming contrast .
your words have delineated very prettily a graceful apollo : he is present to your imagination,--tall , fair , blue- eyed , and with a grecian profile .
your eyes dwell on a vulcan,--a real blacksmith , brown , broad - shouldered : and blind and lame into the bargain . "
" i never thought of it , before ; but you certainly are rather like vulcan , sir . "
" what questions , mr . rochester ? "
" st . john made you schoolmistress of morton before he knew you were his cousin ? "
" yes . "
" you would often see him ?
he would visit the school sometimes ? "
" daily . "
" he would approve of your plans , jane ?
i know they would be clever , for you are a talented creature ! "
" he approved of them -- yes . "
" he would discover many things in you he could not have expected to find ? some of your accomplishments are not ordinary . "
" i do n't know about that . "
" you had a little cottage near the school , you say : did he ever come there to see you ? "
" now and then ? "
" of an evening ? "
" once or twice . "
a pause .
" how long did you reside with him and his sisters after the cousinship was discovered ? "
" five months . "
" did rivers spend much time with the ladies of his family ? "
" did he study much ? "
" a good deal . "
" what ? "
" hindostanee . "
" and what did you do meantime ? "
" i learnt german , at first . "
" did he teach you ? "
" he did not understand german . "
" did he teach you nothing ? "
" a little hindostanee . "
" rivers taught you hindostanee ? "
" yes , sir . "
" and his sisters also ? "
" no . "
" only you ? "
" only me . "
" did you ask to learn ? "
" no . "
" he wished to teach you ? "
" yes . "
a second pause .
" why did he wish it ?
of what use could hindostanee be to you ? "
" he intended me to go with him to india . "
" ah ! here i reach the root of the matter . he wanted you to marry him ? "
" he asked me to marry him . "
" that is a fiction -- an impudent invention to vex me . "
" i beg your pardon , it is the literal truth : he asked me more than once , and was as stiff about urging his point as ever you could be . "
" miss eyre , i repeat it , you can leave me .
how often am i to say the same thing ? why do you remain pertinaciously perched on my knee , when i have given you notice to quit ? "
" because i am comfortable there . "
oh , till this moment , i thought my little jane was all mine !
i had a belief she loved me even when she left me : that was an atom of sweet in much bitter .
but it is useless grieving .
jane , leave me : go and marry rivers . "
" shake me off , then , sir,--push me away , for i 'll not leave you of my own accord . "
" jane , i ever like your tone of voice : it still renews hope , it sounds so truthful . when i hear it , it carries me back a year . i forget that you have formed a new tie .
but i am not a fool -- go-- "
" where must i go , sir ? "
" your own way -- with the husband you have chosen . "
" who is that ? "
" you know -- this st . john rivers . "
" he is not my husband , nor ever will be .
he does not love me : i do not love him .
he loves ( as he _ can _ love , and that is not as you love ) a beautiful young lady called rosamond . he wanted to marry me only because he thought i should make a suitable missionary 's wife , which she would not have done .
he is good and great , but severe ; and , for me , cold as an iceberg .
he is not like you , sir : i am not happy at his side , nor near him , nor with him . he has no indulgence for me -- no fondness . he sees nothing attractive in me ; not even youth -- only a few useful mental points.--then i must leave you , sir , to go to him ? "
i shuddered involuntarily , and clung instinctively closer to my blind but beloved master .
he smiled .
" what , jane ! is this true ? is such really the state of matters between you and rivers ? "
" absolutely , sir !
oh , you need not be jealous !
but if you wish me to love you , could you but see how much i _ do _ love you , you would be proud and content .
again , as he kissed me , painful thoughts darkened his aspect .
" my seared vision ! my crippled strength ! " he murmured regretfully .
i caressed , in order to soothe him . i knew of what he was thinking , and wanted to speak for him , but dared not .
as he turned aside his face a minute , i saw a tear slide from under the sealed eyelid , and trickle down the manly cheek .
my heart swelled .
" and what right would that ruin have to bid a budding woodbine cover its decay with freshness ? "
again he smiled : i gave him comfort .
" you speak of friends , jane ? " he asked .
" yes , of friends , " i answered rather hesitatingly : for i knew i meant more than friends , but could not tell what other word to employ .
he helped me . " ah ! jane . but i want a wife . "
" do you , sir ? "
" yes : is it news to you ? "
" of course : you said nothing about it before . "
" is it unwelcome news ? "
" that depends on circumstances , sir -- on your choice . "
" which you shall make for me , jane . i will abide by your decision . "
" choose then , sir--_her who loves you best _ . "
" i will at least choose--_her i love best _ .
jane , will you marry me ? "
" yes , sir . "
" a poor blind man , whom you will have to lead about by the hand ? "
" yes , sir . "
" truly , jane ? "
" most truly , sir . "
" oh ! my darling ! god bless you and reward you ! "
" mr . rochester , if ever i did a good deed in my life -- if ever i thought a good thought -- if ever i prayed a sincere and blameless prayer -- if ever i wished a righteous wish,--i am rewarded now .
to be your wife is , for me , to be as happy as i can be on earth . "
" because you delight in sacrifice . "
" sacrifice ! what do i sacrifice ?
if so , then certainly i delight in sacrifice . "
" and to bear with my infirmities , jane : to overlook my deficiencies . "
" which are none , sir , to me .
" hitherto i have hated to be helped -- to be led : henceforth , i feel i shall hate it no more .
i did not like to put my hand into a hireling 's , but it is pleasant to feel it circled by jane 's little fingers .
i preferred utter loneliness to the constant attendance of servants ; but jane 's soft ministry will be a perpetual joy .
jane suits me : do i suit her ? "
" to the finest fibre of my nature , sir . "
" the case being so , we have nothing in the world to wait for : we must be married instantly . "
he looked and spoke with eagerness : his old impetuosity was rising .
" mr . rochester , i have just discovered the sun is far declined from its meridian , and pilot is actually gone home to his dinner . let me look at your watch . "
" fasten it into your girdle , janet , and keep it henceforward : i have no use for it . "
" it is nearly four o'clock in the afternoon , sir . do n't you feel hungry ? "
" the third day from this must be our wedding - day , jane .
never mind fine clothes and jewels , now : all that is not worth a fillip . "
" the sun has dried up all the rain - drops , sir . the breeze is still : it is quite hot . "
" we will go home through the wood : that will be the shadiest way . "
he sees not as man sees , but far clearer : judges not as man judges , but far more wisely .
i did wrong : i would have sullied my innocent flower -- breathed guilt on its purity : the omnipotent snatched it from me .
i , in my stiff- necked rebellion , almost cursed the dispensation : instead of bending to the decree , i defied it .
divine justice pursued its course ; disasters came thick on me : i was forced to pass through the valley of the shadow of death . _ his _ chastisements are mighty ; and one smote me which has humbled me for ever .
you know i was proud of my strength : but what is it now , when i must give it over to foreign guidance , as a child does its weakness ?
of late , jane -- only -- only of late -- i began to see and acknowledge the hand of god in my doom .
oh , i longed for thee both with soul and flesh !
i asked of god , at once in anguish and humility , if i had not been long enough desolate , afflicted , tormented ; and might not soon taste bliss and peace once more .
that i merited all i endured , i acknowledged -- that i could scarcely endure more , i pleaded ; and the alpha and omega of my heart 's wishes broke involuntarily from my lips in the words
--'jane ! jane ! jane ! ' "
" did you speak these words aloud ? "
" i did , jane . if any listener had heard me , he would have thought me mad : i pronounced them with such frantic energy . "
" and it was last monday night , somewhere near midnight ? "
" yes ; but the time is of no consequence : what followed is the strange point .
" as i exclaimed ' jane ! jane ! jane ! '
a voice -- i can not tell whence the voice came , but i know whose voice it was -- replied , ' i am coming : wait for me ; ' and a moment after , went whispering on the wind the words--'where are you ? '
ferndean is buried , as you see , in a heavy wood , where sound falls dull , and dies unreverberating .
' where are you ? ' seemed spoken amongst mountains ; for i heard a hill - sent echo repeat the words .
cooler and fresher at the moment the gale seemed to visit my brow : i could have deemed that in some wild , lone scene , i and jane were meeting . in spirit , i believe we must have met .
reader , it was on monday night -- near midnight -- that i too had received the mysterious summons : those were the very words by which i replied to it . i listened to mr . rochester 's narrative , but made no disclosure in return .
the coincidence struck me as too awful and inexplicable to be communicated or discussed .
i kept these things then , and pondered them in my heart .
" you can not now wonder , " continued my master , " that when you rose upon me so unexpectedly last night , i had difficulty in believing you any other than a mere voice and vision , something that would melt to silence and annihilation , as the midnight whisper and mountain echo had melted before . now , i thank god ! i know it to be otherwise .
yes , i thank god ! " he put me off his knee , rose , and reverently lifting his hat from his brow , and bending his sightless eyes to the earth , he stood in mute devotion .
only the last words of the worship were audible .
" i thank my maker , that , in the midst of judgment , he has remembered mercy . i humbly entreat my redeemer to give me strength to lead henceforth a purer life than i have done hitherto ! "
then he stretched his hand out to be led . i took that dear hand , held it a moment to my lips , then let it pass round my shoulder : being so much lower of stature than he , i served both for his prop and guide .
we entered the wood , and wended homeward .
chapter xxxviii -- conclusion
reader , i married him .
a quiet wedding we had : he and i , the parson and clerk , were alone present .
" mary , i have been married to mr . rochester this morning . "
" have you , miss ? well , for sure ! "
a short time after she pursued--"i seed you go out with the master , but i did n't know you were gone to church to be we d ; " and she basted away .
" i telled mary how it would be , " he said : " i knew what mr . edward " ( john was an old servant , and had known his master when he was the cadet of the house , therefore , he often gave him his christian name)--"i knew what mr . edward would do ; and i was certain he would not wait long neither : and he 's done right , for aught i know . i wish you joy , miss ! " and he politely pulled his forelock .
" thank you , john .
mr . rochester told me to give you and mary this . "
i put into his hand a five - pound note . without waiting to hear more , i left the kitchen .
in passing the door of that sanctum some time after , i caught the words--
" she 'll happen do better for him nor ony o't ' grand ladies . "
diana and mary approved the step unreservedly .
" she had better not wait till then , jane , " said mr . rochester , when i read her letter to him ; " if she does , she will be too late , for our honeymoon will shine our life long : its beams will only fade over your grave or mine . "
how st . john received the news , i do n't know : he never answered the letter in which i communicated it : yet six months after he wrote to me , without , however , mentioning mr . rochester 's name or alluding to my marriage .
his letter was then calm , and , though very serious , kind .
her frantic joy at beholding me again moved me much .
she looked pale and thin : she said she was not happy .
i found the rules of the establishment were too strict , its course of study too severe for a child of her age : i took her home with me .
i meant to become her governess once more , but i soon found this impracticable ; my time and cares were now required by another -- my husband needed them all . so i sought out a school conducted on a more indulgent system , and near enough to permit of my visiting her often , and bringing her home sometimes .
as she grew up , a sound english education corrected in a great measure her french defects ; and when she left school , i found in her a pleasing and obliging companion : docile , good - tempered , and well - principled .
by her grateful attention to me and mine , she has long since well repaid any little kindness i ever had it in my power to offer her .
my tale draws to its close : one word respecting my experience of married life , and one brief glance at the fortunes of those whose names have most frequently recurred in this narrative , and i have done .
i have now been married ten years . i know what it is to live entirely for and with what i love best on earth .
we talk , i believe , all day long : to talk to each other is but a more animated and an audible thinking .
all my confidence is bestowed on him , all his confidence is devoted to me ; we are precisely suited in character -- perfect concord is the result .
" jane , have you a glittering ornament round your neck ? "
i had a gold watch - chain : i answered " yes . "
" and have you a pale blue dress on ? "
i had .
he informed me then , that for some time he had fancied the obscurity clouding one eye was becoming less dense ; and that now he was sure of it .
he and i went up to london . he had the advice of an eminent oculist ; and he eventually recovered the sight of that one eye .
on that occasion , he again , with a full heart , acknowledged that god had tempered judgment with mercy .
my edward and i , then , are happy : and the more so , because those we most love are happy likewise .
diana and mary rivers are both married : alternately , once every year , they come to see us , and we go to see them .
diana 's husband is a captain in the navy , a gallant officer and a good man .
mary 's is a clergyman , a college friend of her brother 's , and , from his attainments and principles , worthy of the connection .
both captain fitzjames and mr . wharton love their wives , and are loved by them .
as to st . john rivers , he left england : he went to india . he entered on the path he had marked for himself ; he pursues it still .
firm , faithful , and devoted , full of energy , and zeal , and truth , he labours for his race ; he clears their painful way to improvement ; he hews down like a giant the prejudices of creed and caste that encumber it .
st . john is unmarried : he never will marry now .
himself has hitherto sufficed to the toil , and the toil draws near its close : his glorious sun hastens to its setting .
the last letter i received from him drew from my eyes human tears , and yet filled my heart with divine joy : he anticipated his sure reward , his incorruptible crown .
i know that a stranger 's hand will write to me next , to say that the good and faithful servant has been called at length into the joy of his lord .
no fear of death will darken st . john 's last hour : his mind will be unclouded , his heart will be undaunted , his hope will be sure , his faith steadfast .
his own words are a pledge of this-- " my master , " he says , " has forewarned me . daily he announces more distinctly,--'surely i come quickly ! ' and hourly i more eagerly respond,--'amen ; even so come , lord jesus ! ' "
source : project gutenbergtranslation : f. p. walteraudiobook available here
twenty thousand leagues under the seas
jules verne
first part
chapter 1 a runaway reef
in essence , over a period of time several ships had encountered " an enormous thing " at sea , a long spindle - shaped object , sometimes giving off a phosphorescent glow , infinitely bigger and faster than any whale .
now then , it did exist , this was an undeniable fact ; and since the human mind dotes on objects of wonder , you can understand the worldwide excitement caused by this unearthly apparition . as for relegating it to the realm of fiction , that charge had to be dropped .
in essence , on july 20 , 1866 , the steamer governor higginson , from the calcutta & burnach steam navigation co. , encountered this moving mass five miles off the eastern shores of australia . captain baker at first thought he was in the presence of an unknown reef ; he was even about to fix its exact position when two waterspouts shot out of this inexplicable object and sprang hissing into the air some 150 feet . so , unless this reef was subject to the intermittent eruptions of a geyser , the governor higginson had fair and honest dealings with some aquatic mammal , until then unknown , that could spurt from its blowholes waterspouts mixed with air and steam .
in every big city the monster was the latest rage ; they sang about it in the coffee houses , they ridiculed it in the newspapers , they dramatized it in the theaters . the tabloids found it a fine opportunity for hatching all sorts of hoaxes . in those newspapers short of copy , you saw the reappearance of every gigantic imaginary creature , from " moby dick , " that dreadful white whale from the high arctic regions , to the stupendous kraken whose tentacles could entwine a 500-ton craft and drag it into the ocean depths . they even reprinted reports from ancient times : the views of aristotle and pliny accepting the existence of such monsters , then the norwegian stories of bishop pontoppidan , the narratives of paul egede , and finally the reports of captain harrington-- whose good faith is above suspicion -- in which he claims he saw , while aboard the castilian in 1857 , one of those enormous serpents that , until then , had frequented only the seas of france 's old extremist newspaper , the constitutionalist .
this accident happened around five o'clock in the morning , just as day was beginning to break . the officers on watch rushed to the craft 's stern . they examined the ocean with the most scrupulous care . they saw nothing except a strong eddy breaking three cable lengths out , as if those sheets of water had been violently churned . the site 's exact bearings were taken , and the moravian continued on course apparently undamaged . had it run afoul of an underwater rock or the wreckage of some enormous derelict ship ? they were unable to say . but when they examined its undersides in the service yard , they discovered that part of its keel had been smashed .
this occurrence , extremely serious in itself , might perhaps have been forgotten like so many others , if three weeks later it had n't been reenacted under identical conditions . only , thanks to the nationality of the ship victimized by this new ramming , and thanks to the reputation of the company to which this ship belonged , the event caused an immense uproar .
at 4:17 in the afternoon , during a high tea for passengers gathered in the main lounge , a collision occurred , scarcely noticeable on the whole , affecting the scotia 's hull in that quarter a little astern of its port paddle wheel .
" we 're sinking ! we 're sinking ! "
at first the passengers were quite frightened , but captain anderson hastened to reassure them . in fact , there could be no immediate danger . divided into seven compartments by watertight bulkheads , the scotia could brave any leak with impunity .
captain anderson immediately made his way into the hold . he discovered that the fifth compartment had been invaded by the sea , and the speed of this invasion proved that the leak was considerable . fortunately this compartment did n't contain the boilers , because their furnaces would have been abruptly extinguished .
this was the last straw , and it resulted in arousing public passions all over again . indeed , from this moment on , any maritime casualty without an established cause was charged to the monster 's account . this outrageous animal had to shoulder responsibility for all derelict vessels , whose numbers are unfortunately considerable , since out of those 3,000 ships whose losses are recorded annually at the marine insurance bureau , the figure for steam or sailing ships supposedly lost with all hands , in the absence of any news , amounts to at least 200 !
now then , justly or unjustly , it was the " monster " who stood accused of their disappearance ; and since , thanks to it , travel between the various continents had become more and more dangerous , the public spoke up and demanded straight out that , at all cost , the seas be purged of this fearsome cetacean .
chapter 2
the pros and cons
when i arrived in new york , the question was at the boiling point . the hypothesis of a drifting islet or an elusive reef , put forward by people not quite in their right minds , was completely eliminated . and indeed , unless this reef had an engine in its belly , how could it move about with such prodigious speed ?
also discredited was the idea of a floating hull or some other enormous wreckage , and again because of this speed of movement .
so only two possible solutions to the question were left , creating two very distinct groups of supporters : on one side , those favoring a monster of colossal strength ; on the other , those favoring an " underwater boat " of tremendous motor power .
i complied . since i could no longer hold my tongue , i let it wag . i discussed the question in its every aspect , both political and scientific , and this is an excerpt from the well - padded article i published in the issue of april 30 .
" therefore , " i wrote , " after examining these different hypotheses one by one , we are forced , every other supposition having been refuted , to accept the existence of an extremely powerful marine animal .
" the deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us . no soundings have been able to reach them . what goes on in those distant depths ? what creatures inhabit , or could inhabit , those regions twelve or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water ? what is the constitution of these animals ? it 's almost beyond conjecture .
" however , the solution to this problem submitted to me can take the form of a choice between two alternatives .
" either we know every variety of creature populating our planet , or we do not .
" if we do not know every one of them , if nature still keeps ichthyological secrets from us , nothing is more admissible than to accept the existence of fish or cetaceans of new species or even new genera , animals with a basically ' cast - iron ' constitution that inhabit strata beyond the reach of our soundings , and which some development or other , an urge or a whim if you prefer , can bring to the upper level of the ocean for long intervals .
" if , on the other hand , we do know every living species , we must look for the animal in question among those marine creatures already cataloged , and in this event i would be inclined to accept the existence of a giant narwhale .
" the common narwhale , or sea unicorn , often reaches a length of sixty feet . increase its dimensions fivefold or even tenfold , then give this cetacean a strength in proportion to its size while enlarging its offensive weapons , and you have the animal we 're looking for . it would have the proportions determined by the officers of the shannon , the instrument needed to perforate the scotia , and the power to pierce a steamer 's hull .
" all right then ! imagine this weapon to be ten times stronger and the animal ten times more powerful , launch it at a speed of twenty miles per hour , multiply its mass times its velocity , and you get just the collision we need to cause the specified catastrophe .
" this inexplicable phenomenon is thus explained away -- unless it 's something else entirely , which , despite everything that has been sighted , studied , explored and experienced , is still possible ! "
these last words were cowardly of me ; but as far as i could , i wanted to protect my professorial dignity and not lay myself open to laughter from the americans , who when they do laugh , laugh raucously . i had left myself a loophole . yet deep down , i had accepted the existence of " the monster . "
but , as it always happens , just when a decision had been made to chase the monster , the monster put in no further appearances . for two months nobody heard a word about it . not a single ship encountered it . apparently the unicorn had gotten wise to these plots being woven around it . people were constantly babbling about the creature , even via the atlantic cable ! accordingly , the wags claimed that this slippery rascal had waylaid some passing telegram and was making the most of it .
so the frigate was equipped for a far - off voyage and armed with fearsome fishing gear , but nobody knew where to steer it . and impatience grew until , on june 2 , word came that the tampico , a steamer on the san francisco line sailing from california to shanghai , had sighted the animal again , three weeks before in the northerly seas of the pacific .
this news caused intense excitement . not even a 24-hour breather was granted to commander farragut . his provisions were loaded on board . his coal bunkers were overflowing . not a crewman was missing from his post . to cast off , he needed only to fire and stoke his furnaces ! half a day 's delay would have been unforgivable ! but commander farragut wanted nothing more than to go forth .
i received a letter three hours before the abraham lincoln left its brooklyn pier ; the letter read as follows : pierre aronnax
professor at the paris museum fifth avenue hotel
new york
sir :
if you would like to join the expedition on the abraham lincoln , the government of the union will be pleased to regard you as france 's representative in this undertaking . commander farragut has a cabin at your disposal .
very cordially yours , j. b. hobson , secretary of the navy .
chapter 3
as master wishes
" besides , " i mused , " all roads lead home to europe , and our unicorn may be gracious enough to take me toward the coast of france ! that fine animal may even let itself be captured in european seas -- as a personal favor to me -- and i 'll bring back to the museum of natural history at least half a meter of its ivory lance ! "
but in the meantime i would have to look for this narwhale in the northern pacific ocean ; which meant returning to france by way of the antipodes .
" conseil ! " i called in an impatient voice .
the lad was thirty years old , and his age to that of his employer was as fifteen is to twenty . please forgive me for this underhanded way of admitting i had turned forty .
but conseil had one flaw . he was a fanatic on formality , and he only addressed me in the third person -- to the point where it got tiresome .
" conseil ! " i repeated , while feverishly beginning my preparations for departure .
to be sure , i had confidence in this devoted lad . ordinarily , i never asked whether or not it suited him to go with me on my journeys ; but this time an expedition was at issue that could drag on indefinitely , a hazardous undertaking whose purpose was to hunt an animal that could sink a frigate as easily as a walnut shell ! there was good reason to stop and think , even for the world 's most emotionless man . what would conseil say ?
" conseil ! " i called a third time .
conseil appeared .
" did master summon me ? " he said , entering .
" yes , my boy . get my things ready , get yours ready . we 're departing in two hours . "
" as master wishes , " conseil replied serenely .
" we have n't a moment to lose . pack as much into my trunk as you can , my traveling kit , my suits , shirts , and socks , do n't bother counting , just squeeze it all in -- and hurry ! "
" what about master 's collections ? " conseil ventured to observe .
" we 'll deal with them later . "
" what ! the archaeotherium , hyracotherium , oreodonts , cheiropotamus , and master 's other fossil skeletons ? "
" the hotel will keep them for us . "
" what about master 's live babirusa ? "
" they 'll feed it during our absence . anyhow , we 'll leave instructions to ship the whole menagerie to france . "
" then we are n't returning to paris ? " conseil asked .
" whatever detour master wishes . "
" oh , it 's nothing really ! a route slightly less direct , that 's all . we 're leaving on the abraham lincoln . "
" as master thinks best , " conseil replied placidly .
" what master does , i 'll do , " conseil replied .
" but think it over , because i do n't want to hide anything from you . this is one of those voyages from which people do n't always come back ! "
" as master wishes . "
a quarter of an hour later , our trunks were ready . conseil did them in a flash , and i was sure the lad had n't missed a thing , because he classified shirts and suits as expertly as birds and mammals .
our baggage was immediately carried to the deck of the frigate . i rushed aboard . i asked for commander farragut . one of the sailors led me to the afterdeck , where i stood in the presence of a smart - looking officer who extended his hand to me .
" professor pierre aronnax ? " he said to me .
" the same , " i replied . " commander farragut ? "
" in person . welcome aboard , professor . your cabin is waiting for you . "
i bowed , and letting the commander attend to getting under way , i was taken to the cabin that had been set aside for me .
the abraham lincoln had been perfectly chosen and fitted out for its new assignment . it was a high - speed frigate furnished with superheating equipment that allowed the tension of its steam to build to seven atmospheres . under this pressure the abraham lincoln reached an average speed of 18.3 miles per hour , a considerable speed but still not enough to cope with our gigantic cetacean .
the frigate 's interior accommodations complemented its nautical virtues . i was well satisfied with my cabin , which was located in the stern and opened into the officers ' mess .
" we 'll be quite comfortable here , " i told conseil .
" with all due respect to master , " conseil replied , " as comfortable as a hermit crab inside the shell of a whelk . "
i left conseil to the proper stowing of our luggage and climbed on deck to watch the preparations for getting under way .
but commander farragut did n't want to waste a single day , or even a single hour , in making for those seas where the animal had just been sighted . he summoned his engineer .
" are we up to pressure ? " he asked the man .
" aye , sir , " the engineer replied .
" go ahead , then ! " commander farragut called .
the wharves of brooklyn , and every part of new york bordering the east river , were crowded with curiosity seekers . departing from 500,000 throats , three cheers burst forth in succession . thousands of handkerchiefs were waving above these tightly packed masses , hailing the abraham lincoln until it reached the waters of the hudson river , at the tip of the long peninsula that forms new york city .
chapter 4
ned land
the ship 's officers shared the views of their leader . they could be heard chatting , discussing , arguing , calculating the different chances of an encounter , and observing the vast expanse of the ocean . voluntary watches from the crosstrees of the topgallant sail were self - imposed by more than one who would have cursed such toil under any other circumstances . as often as the sun swept over its daily arc , the masts were populated with sailors whose feet itched and could n't hold still on the planking of the deck below ! and the abraham lincoln 's stempost had n't even cut the suspected waters of the pacific .
as for the crew , they only wanted to encounter the unicorn , harpoon it , haul it on board , and carve it up . they surveyed the sea with scrupulous care . besides , commander farragut had mentioned that a certain sum of $ 2,000.00 was waiting for the man who first sighted the animal , be he cabin boy or sailor , mate or officer . i 'll let the reader decide whether eyes got proper exercise aboard the abraham lincoln .
as i said , commander farragut had carefully equipped his ship with all the gear needed to fish for a gigantic cetacean . no whaling vessel could have been better armed . we had every known mechanism , from the hand - hurled harpoon , to the blunderbuss firing barbed arrows , to the duck gun with exploding bullets . on the forecastle was mounted the latest model breech - loading cannon , very heavy of barrel and narrow of bore , a weapon that would figure in the universal exhibition of 1867 . made in america , this valuable instrument could fire a four - kilogram conical projectile an average distance of sixteen kilometers without the least bother .
so the abraham lincoln was n't lacking in means of destruction . but it had better still . it had ned land , the king of harpooners .
to say canadian is to say french , and as unsociable as ned land was , i must admit he took a definite liking to me . no doubt it was my nationality that attracted him . it was an opportunity for him to speak , and for me to hear , that old rabelaisian dialect still used in some canadian provinces . the harpooner 's family originated in quebec , and they were already a line of bold fishermen back in the days when this town still belonged to france .
and now , what were ned land 's views on this question of a marine monster ? i must admit that he flatly did n't believe in the unicorn , and alone on board , he did n't share the general conviction . he avoided even dealing with the subject , for which one day i felt compelled to take him to task .
during the magnificent evening of june 25 - -in other words , three weeks after our departure -- the frigate lay abreast of cabo blanco , thirty miles to leeward of the coast of patagonia . we had crossed the tropic of capricorn , and the strait of magellan opened less than 700 miles to the south . before eight days were out , the abraham lincoln would plow the waves of the pacific .
seated on the afterdeck , ned land and i chatted about one thing and another , staring at that mysterious sea whose depths to this day are beyond the reach of human eyes . quite naturally , i led our conversation around to the giant unicorn , and i weighed our expedition 's various chances for success or failure . then , seeing that ned just let me talk without saying much himself , i pressed him more closely .
" ned , " i asked him , " how can you still doubt the reality of this cetacean we 're after ? do you have any particular reasons for being so skeptical ? "
the harpooner stared at me awhile before replying , slapped his broad forehead in one of his standard gestures , closed his eyes as if to collect himself , and finally said :
" just maybe , professor aronnax . "
" but ned , you 're a professional whaler , a man familiar with all the great marine mammals -- your mind should easily accept this hypothesis of an enormous cetacean , and you ought to be the last one to doubt it under these circumstances ! "
" wooden ships maybe , " the canadian replied . " but i 've never seen the like . so till i have proof to the contrary , i 'll deny that baleen whales , sperm whales , or unicorns can do any such thing . "
" listen to me , ned-- "
" no , no , professor . i 'll go along with anything you want except that . some gigantic devilfish maybe . . . ? "
" even less likely , ned . the devilfish is merely a mollusk , and even this name hints at its semiliquid flesh , because it 's latin meaning soft one . the devilfish does n't belong to the vertebrate branch , and even if it were 500 feet long , it would still be utterly harmless to ships like the scotia or the abraham lincoln . consequently , the feats of krakens or other monsters of that ilk must be relegated to the realm of fiction . "
" so , mr . naturalist , " ned land continued in a bantering tone , " you 'll just keep on believing in the existence of some enormous cetacean . . . ? "
" yes , ned , i repeat it with a conviction backed by factual logic . i believe in the existence of a mammal with a powerful constitution , belonging to the vertebrate branch like baleen whales , sperm whales , or dolphins , and armed with a tusk made of horn that has tremendous penetrating power . "
" humph ! " the harpooner put in , shaking his head with the attitude of a man who does n't want to be convinced .
" note well , my fine canadian , " i went on , " if such an animal exists , if it lives deep in the ocean , if it frequents the liquid strata located miles beneath the surface of the water , it needs to have a constitution so solid , it defies all comparison . "
" and why this powerful constitution ? " ned asked .
" because it takes incalculable strength just to live in those deep strata and withstand their pressure . "
" oh really ? " ned said , tipping me a wink .
" oh really , and i can prove it to you with a few simple figures . "
" bosh ! " ned replied . " you can make figures do anything you want ! "
" i have n't the foggiest notion , professor aronnax . "
" about 17,000 . "
" as many as that ? "
" without my noticing it ? "
" without your noticing it . and if you are n't crushed by so much pressure , it 's because the air penetrates the interior of your body with equal pressure . when the inside and outside pressures are in perfect balance , they neutralize each other and allow you to tolerate them without discomfort . but in the water it 's another story . "
" yes , i see , " ned replied , growing more interested . " because the water surrounds me but does n't penetrate me . "
" fire and brimstone ! " ned put in .
" they 'd need to be manufactured , " ned land replied , " from sheet - iron plates eight inches thick , like ironclad frigates . "
" right , ned , and then picture the damage such a mass could inflict if it were launched with the speed of an express train against a ship 's hull . "
" yes . . . indeed . . . maybe , " the canadian replied , staggered by these figures but still not willing to give in .
" well , have i convinced you ? "
" you 've convinced me of one thing , mr . naturalist . that deep in the sea , such animals would need to be just as strong as you say-- if they exist . "
" but if they do n't exist , my stubborn harpooner , how do you explain the accident that happened to the scotia ? "
" it 's maybe . . . , " ned said , hesitating .
" go on ! "
" because . . . it just could n't be true ! " the canadian replied , unconsciously echoing a famous catchphrase of the scientist arago .
but this reply proved nothing , other than how bullheaded the harpooner could be . that day i pressed him no further . the scotia 's accident was undeniable . its hole was real enough that it had to be plugged up , and i do n't think a hole 's existence can be more emphatically proven . now then , this hole did n't make itself , and since it had n't resulted from underwater rocks or underwater machines , it must have been caused by the perforating tool of some animal .
now , for all the reasons put forward to this point , i believed that this animal was a member of the branch vertebrata , class mammalia , group pisciforma , and finally , order cetacea . as for the family in which it would be placed ( baleen whale , sperm whale , or dolphin ) , the genus to which it belonged , and the species in which it would find its proper home , these questions had to be left for later . to answer them called for dissecting this unknown monster ; to dissect it called for catching it ; to catch it called for harpooning it-- which was ned land 's business ; to harpoon it called for sighting it-- which was the crew 's business ; and to sight it called for encountering it-- which was a chancy business .
chapter 5 at random !
for some while the voyage of the abraham lincoln was marked by no incident . but one circumstance arose that displayed ned land 's marvelous skills and showed just how much confidence we could place in him .
off the falkland islands on june 30 , the frigate came in contact with a fleet of american whalers , and we learned that they had n't seen the narwhale . but one of them , the captain of the monroe , knew that ned land had shipped aboard the abraham lincoln and asked his help in hunting a baleen whale that was in sight . anxious to see ned land at work , commander farragut authorized him to make his way aboard the monroe . and the canadian had such good luck that with a right - and - left shot , he harpooned not one whale but two , striking the first straight to the heart and catching the other after a few minutes ' chase !
assuredly , if the monster ever had to deal with ned land 's harpoon , i would n't bet on the monster .
near three o'clock in the afternoon on july 6 , fifteen miles south of shore , the abraham lincoln doubled that solitary islet at the tip of the south american continent , that stray rock dutch seamen had named cape horn after their hometown of hoorn . our course was set for the northwest , and the next day our frigate 's propeller finally churned the waters of the pacific .
" open your eyes ! open your eyes ! " repeated the sailors of the abraham lincoln .
and they opened amazingly wide . eyes and spyglasses ( a bit dazzled , it is true , by the vista of $ 2,000.00 ) did n't remain at rest for an instant . day and night we observed the surface of the ocean , and those with nyctalopic eyes , whose ability to see in the dark increased their chances by fifty percent , had an excellent shot at winning the prize .
" if master 's eyes would kindly stop bulging , master will see farther ! "
however , the weather held good . our voyage was proceeding under the most favorable conditions . by then it was the bad season in these southernmost regions , because july in this zone corresponds to our january in europe ; but the sea remained smooth and easily visible over a vast perimeter .
ned land still kept up the most tenacious skepticism ; beyond his spells on watch , he pretended that he never even looked at the surface of the waves , at least while no whales were in sight . and yet the marvelous power of his vision could have performed yeoman service . but this stubborn canadian spent eight hours out of every twelve reading or sleeping in his cabin . a hundred times i chided him for his unconcern .
" bah ! " he replied . " nothing 's out there , professor aronnax , and if there is some animal , what chance would we have of spotting it ? ca n't you see we 're just wandering around at random ? people say they 've sighted this slippery beast again in the pacific high seas-- i 'm truly willing to believe it , but two months have already gone by since then , and judging by your narwhale 's personality , it hates growing moldy from hanging out too long in the same waterways ! it 's blessed with a terrific gift for getting around . now , professor , you know even better than i that nature does n't violate good sense , and she would n't give some naturally slow animal the ability to move swiftly if it had n't a need to use that talent . so if the beast does exist , it 's already long gone ! "
i had no reply to this . obviously we were just groping blindly . but how else could we go about it ? all the same , our chances were automatically pretty limited . yet everyone still felt confident of success , and not a sailor on board would have bet against the narwhale appearing , and soon .
we were finally in the area of the monster 's latest antics ! and in all honesty , shipboard conditions became life - threatening . hearts were pounding hideously , gearing up for futures full of incurable aneurysms . the entire crew suffered from a nervous excitement that it 's beyond me to describe . nobody ate , nobody slept . twenty times a day some error in perception , or the optical illusions of some sailor perched in the crosstrees , would cause intolerable anguish , and this emotion , repeated twenty times over , kept us in a state of irritability so intense that a reaction was bound to follow .
and this reaction was n't long in coming . for three months , during which each day seemed like a century , the abraham lincoln plowed all the northerly seas of the pacific , racing after whales sighted , abruptly veering off course , swerving sharply from one tack to another , stopping suddenly , putting on steam and reversing engines in quick succession , at the risk of stripping its gears , and it did n't leave a single point unexplored from the beaches of japan to the coasts of america . and we found nothing ! nothing except an immenseness of deserted waves ! nothing remotely resembling a gigantic narwhale , or an underwater islet , or a derelict shipwreck , or a runaway reef , or anything the least bit unearthly !
at noon the next day , november 5 , the agreed - upon delay expired . after a position fix , true to his promise , commander farragut would have to set his course for the southeast and leave the northerly regions of the pacific decisively behind .
by then the frigate lay in latitude 31 degrees 15 ' north and longitude 136 degrees 42 ' east . the shores of japan were less than 200 miles to our leeward . night was coming on . eight o'clock had just struck . huge clouds covered the moon 's disk , then in its first quarter . the sea undulated placidly beneath the frigate 's stempost .
just then i was in the bow , leaning over the starboard rail . conseil , stationed beside me , stared straight ahead . roosting in the shrouds , the crew examined the horizon , which shrank and darkened little by little . officers were probing the increasing gloom with their night glasses . sometimes the murky ocean sparkled beneath moonbeams that darted between the fringes of two clouds . then all traces of light vanished into the darkness .
observing conseil , i discovered that , just barely , the gallant lad had fallen under the general influence . at least so i thought . perhaps his nerves were twitching with curiosity for the first time in history .
" come on , conseil ! " i told him . " here 's your last chance to pocket that $ 2,000.00 ! "
" if master will permit my saying so , " conseil replied , " i never expected to win that prize , and the union government could have promised $ 100,000.00 and been none the poorer . "
" you 're right , conseil , it turned out to be a foolish business after all , and we jumped into it too hastily . what a waste of time , what a futile expense of emotion ! six months ago we could have been back in france-- "
" in master 's little apartment , " conseil answered . " in master 's museum ! and by now i would have classified master 's fossils . and master 's babirusa would be ensconced in its cage at the zoo in the botanical gardens , and it would have attracted every curiosity seeker in town ! "
" quite so , conseil , and what 's more , i imagine that people will soon be poking fun at us ! "
" to be sure , " conseil replied serenely , " i do think they 'll have fun at master 's expense . and must it be said . . . ? "
" it must be said , conseil . "
" well then , it will serve master right ! "
" how true ! "
" when one has the honor of being an expert as master is , one must n't lay himself open to-- "
conseil did n't have time to complete the compliment . in the midst of the general silence , a voice became audible . it was ned land 's voice , and it shouted :
" ahoy ! there 's the thing in question , abreast of us to leeward ! "
chapter 6
at full steam
by then the darkness was profound , and as good as the canadian 's eyes were , i still wondered how he could see -- and what he had seen . my heart was pounding fit to burst .
but ned land was not mistaken , and we all spotted the object his hand was indicating .
two cable lengths off the abraham lincoln 's starboard quarter , the sea seemed to be lit up from underneath . this was no mere phosphorescent phenomenon , that much was unmistakable . submerged some fathoms below the surface of the water , the monster gave off that very intense but inexplicable glow that several captains had mentioned in their reports . this magnificent radiance had to come from some force with a great illuminating capacity . the edge of its light swept over the sea in an immense , highly elongated oval , condensing at the center into a blazing core whose unbearable glow diminished by degrees outward .
" it 's only a cluster of phosphorescent particles ! " exclaimed one of the officers .
" no , sir , " i answered with conviction . " not even angel - wing clams or salps have ever given off such a powerful light . that glow is basically electric in nature . besides . . . look , look ! it 's shifting ! it 's moving back and forth ! it 's darting at us ! "
a universal shout went up from the frigate .
sailors rushed to the helm , engineers to their machinery . under reverse steam immediately , the abraham lincoln beat to port , sweeping in a semicircle .
" right your helm ! engines forward ! " commander farragut called .
these orders were executed , and the frigate swiftly retreated from this core of light .
my mistake . it wanted to retreat , but the unearthly animal came at us with a speed double our own .
" you 've no further doubts , commander , as to the nature of this animal ? "
" no , sir , it 's apparently a gigantic narwhale , and an electric one to boot . "
" maybe , " i added , " it 's no more approachable than an electric eel or an electric ray ! "
the whole crew stayed on their feet all night long . no one even thought of sleeping . unable to compete with the monster 's speed , the abraham lincoln slowed down and stayed at half steam . for its part , the narwhale mimicked the frigate , simply rode with the waves , and seemed determined not to forsake the field of battle .
however , near midnight it disappeared , or to use a more appropriate expression , " it went out , " like a huge glowworm . had it fled from us ? we were duty bound to fear so rather than hope so . but at 12:53 in the morning , a deafening hiss became audible , resembling the sound made by a waterspout expelled with tremendous intensity .
by then commander farragut , ned land , and i were on the afterdeck , peering eagerly into the profound gloom .
" ned land , " the commander asked , " you 've often heard whales bellowing ? "
" often , sir , but never a whale like this , whose sighting earned me $ 2,000.00 . "
" correct , the prize is rightfully yours . but tell me , is n't that the noise cetaceans make when they spurt water from their blowholes ? "
" if it 's in a mood to listen to you , mr . land , " i replied in a tone far from convinced .
" let me get within four harpoon lengths of it , " the canadian shot back , " and it had better listen ! "
" but to get near it , " the commander went on , " i 'd have to put a whaleboat at your disposal ? "
" certainly , sir . "
" that would be gambling with the lives of my men . "
" and with my own ! " the harpooner replied simply .
" hmm ! " i said to myself . " a cetacean as powerful as a whole cavalry regiment -- now that 's a whale of a whale ! "
at six o'clock day began to break , and with the dawn 's early light , the narwhale 's electric glow disappeared . at seven o'clock the day was well along , but a very dense morning mist shrank the horizon , and our best spyglasses were unable to pierce it . the outcome : disappointment and anger .
i hoisted myself up to the crosstrees of the mizzen sail . some officers were already perched on the mastheads .
" there 's the thing in question , astern to port ! " the harpooner shouted .
every eye looked toward the point indicated .
there , a mile and a half from the frigate , a long blackish body emerged a meter above the waves . quivering violently , its tail was creating a considerable eddy . never had caudal equipment thrashed the sea with such power . an immense wake of glowing whiteness marked the animal 's track , sweeping in a long curve .
our frigate drew nearer to the cetacean . i examined it with a completely open mind . those reports from the shannon and the helvetia had slightly exaggerated its dimensions , and i put its length at only 250 feet . its girth was more difficult to judge , but all in all , the animal seemed to be wonderfully proportioned in all three dimensions .
the crew were waiting impatiently for orders from their leader . the latter , after carefully observing the animal , called for his engineer . the engineer raced over . " sir , " the commander said , " are you up to pressure ? "
" aye , sir , " the engineer replied .
" fine . stoke your furnaces and clap on full steam ! " three cheers greeted this order . the hour of battle had sounded . a few moments later , the frigate 's two funnels vomited torrents of black smoke , and its deck quaked from the trembling of its boilers .
driven forward by its powerful propeller , the abraham lincoln headed straight for the animal . unconcerned , the latter let us come within half a cable length ; then , not bothering to dive , it got up a little speed , retreated , and was content to keep its distance .
this chase dragged on for about three - quarters of an hour without the frigate gaining two fathoms on the cetacean . at this rate , it was obvious that we would never catch up with it .
infuriated , commander farragut kept twisting the thick tuft of hair that flourished below his chin .
" ned land ! " he called .
the canadian reported at once .
" well , mr . land , " the commander asked , " do you still advise putting my longboats to sea ? "
" no , sir , " ned land replied , " because that beast wo n't be caught against its will . "
" then what should we do ? "
" stoke up more steam , sir , if you can . as for me , with your permission i 'll go perch on the bobstays under the bowsprit , and if we can get within a harpoon length , i 'll harpoon the brute . "
" go to it , ned , " commander farragut replied . " engineer , " he called , " keep the pressure mounting ! "
ned land made his way to his post . the furnaces were urged into greater activity ; our propeller did forty - three revolutions per minute , and steam shot from the valves . heaving the log , we verified that the abraham lincoln was going at the rate of 18.5 miles per hour .
but that damned animal also did a speed of 18.5 .
for the next hour our frigate kept up this pace without gaining a fathom ! this was humiliating for one of the fastest racers in the american navy . the crew were working up into a blind rage . sailor after sailor heaved insults at the monster , which could n't be bothered with answering back . commander farragut was no longer content simply to twist his goatee ; he chewed on it .
the engineer was summoned once again .
" you 're up to maximum pressure ? " the commander asked him .
" aye , sir , " the engineer replied .
" and your valves are charged to . . . ? "
" to six and a half atmospheres . "
" charge them to ten atmospheres . "
a typical american order if i ever heard one . it would have sounded just fine during some mississippi paddle - wheeler race , to " outstrip the competition ! "
" conseil , " i said to my gallant servant , now at my side , " you realize that we 'll probably blow ourselves skyhigh ? "
" as master wishes ! " conseil replied .
all right , i admit it : i did wish to run this risk !
we heaved the log a second time .
" well , helmsman ? " commander farragut asked .
" 19.3 miles per hour , sir . "
" keep stoking the furnaces . "
the engineer did so . the pressure gauge marked ten atmospheres . but no doubt the cetacean itself had " warmed up , " because without the least trouble , it also did 19.3 .
what a chase ! no , i ca n't describe the excitement that shook my very being . ned land stayed at his post , harpoon in hand . several times the animal let us approach .
by noon we were no farther along than at eight o'clock in the morning .
commander farragut then decided to use more direct methods .
" bah ! " he said . " so that animal is faster than the abraham lincoln . all right , we 'll see if it can outrun our conical shells ! mate , man the gun in the bow ! "
our forecastle cannon was immediately loaded and leveled . the cannoneer fired a shot , but his shell passed some feet above the cetacean , which stayed half a mile off .
" over to somebody with better aim ! " the commander shouted . " and $ 500.00 to the man who can pierce that infernal beast ! "
calm of eye , cool of feature , an old gray - bearded gunner-- i can see him to this day -- approached the cannon , put it in position , and took aim for a good while . there was a mighty explosion , mingled with cheers from the crew .
the shell reached its target ; it hit the animal , but not in the usual fashion -- it bounced off that rounded surface and vanished into the sea two miles out .
" oh drat ! " said the old gunner in his anger . " that rascal must be covered with six - inch armor plate ! "
" curse the beast ! " commander farragut shouted .
the hunt was on again , and commander farragut leaned over to me , saying : " i 'll chase that animal till my frigate explodes ! "
" yes , " i replied , " and nobody would blame you ! "
we could still hope that the animal would tire out and not be as insensitive to exhaustion as our steam engines . but no such luck . hour after hour went by without it showing the least sign of weariness .
however , to the abraham lincoln 's credit , it must be said that we struggled on with tireless persistence . i estimate that we covered a distance of at least 500 kilometers during this ill - fated day of november 6 . but night fell and wrapped the surging ocean in its shadows .
by then i thought our expedition had come to an end , that we would never see this fantastic animal again . i was mistaken .
the narwhale seemed motionless . was it asleep perhaps , weary from its workday , just riding with the waves ? this was our chance , and commander farragut was determined to take full advantage of it .
he gave his orders . the abraham lincoln stayed at half steam , advancing cautiously so as not to awaken its adversary . in midocean it 's not unusual to encounter whales so sound asleep they can successfully be attacked , and ned land had harpooned more than one in its slumber . the canadian went to resume his post on the bobstays under the bowsprit .
the frigate approached without making a sound , stopped two cable lengths from the animal and coasted . not a soul breathed on board . a profound silence reigned over the deck . we were not 100 feet from the blazing core of light , whose glow grew stronger and dazzled the eyes .
just then , leaning over the forecastle railing , i saw ned land below me , one hand grasping the martingale , the other brandishing his dreadful harpoon . barely twenty feet separated him from the motionless animal .
all at once his arm shot forward and the harpoon was launched . i heard the weapon collide resonantly , as if it had hit some hard substance .
the electric light suddenly went out , and two enormous waterspouts crashed onto the deck of the frigate , racing like a torrent from stem to stern , toppling crewmen , breaking spare masts and yardarms from their lashings .
a hideous collision occurred , and thrown over the rail with no time to catch hold of it , i was hurled into the sea .
chapter 7
a whale of unknown species
although i was startled by this unexpected descent , i at least have a very clear recollection of my sensations during it .
at first i was dragged about twenty feet under . i 'm a good swimmer , without claiming to equal such other authors as byron and edgar allan poe , who were master divers , and i did n't lose my head on the way down . with two vigorous kicks of the heel , i came back to the surface of the sea .
my first concern was to look for the frigate . had the crew seen me go overboard ? was the abraham lincoln tacking about ? would commander farragut put a longboat to sea ? could i hope to be rescued ?
the gloom was profound . i glimpsed a black mass disappearing eastward , where its running lights were fading out in the distance . it was the frigate . i felt i was done for .
" help ! "
this was the last shout i gave . my mouth was filling with water . i struggled against being dragged into the depths . . . .
suddenly my clothes were seized by energetic hands , i felt myself pulled abruptly back to the surface of the sea , and yes , i heard these words pronounced in my ear :
" if master would oblige me by leaning on my shoulder , master will swim with much greater ease . "
with one hand i seized the arm of my loyal conseil .
" you ! " i said . " you ! "
" myself , " conseil replied , " and at master 's command . "
" that collision threw you overboard along with me ? "
" not at all . but being in master 's employ , i followed master . "
the fine lad thought this only natural !
" what about the frigate ? " i asked .
" the frigate ? " conseil replied , rolling over on his back . " i think master had best not depend on it to any great extent ! "
" what are you saying ? "
" i 'm saying that just as i jumped overboard , i heard the men at the helm shout , ' our propeller and rudder are smashed ! ' "
" smashed ? "
" yes , smashed by the monster 's tusk ! i believe it 's the sole injury the abraham lincoln has sustained . but most inconveniently for us , the ship can no longer steer . "
" then we 're done for ! "
" perhaps , " conseil replied serenely . " however , we still have a few hours before us , and in a few hours one can do a great many things ! "
conseil 's unflappable composure cheered me up . i swam more vigorously , but hampered by clothes that were as restricting as a cloak made of lead , i was managing with only the greatest difficulty . conseil noticed as much .
" master will allow me to make an incision , " he said .
and he slipped an open clasp knife under my clothes , slitting them from top to bottom with one swift stroke . then he briskly undressed me while i swam for us both .
i then did conseil the same favor , and we continued to " navigate " side by side .
but our circumstances were no less dreadful . perhaps they had n't seen us go overboard ; and even if they had , the frigate-- being undone by its rudder -- couldn't return to leeward after us . so we could count only on its longboats .
conseil had coolly reasoned out this hypothesis and laid his plans accordingly . an amazing character , this boy ; in midocean , this stoic lad seemed right at home !
slim chance , but hope springs eternal in the human breast ! besides , there were two of us . lastly , i can vouch -- as improbable as it seems -- that even if i had wanted to destroy all my illusions , even if i had been willing to " give in to despair , " i could not have done so !
the cetacean had rammed our frigate at about eleven o'clock in the evening . i therefore calculated on eight hours of swimming until sunrise . a strenuous task , but feasible , thanks to our relieving each other . the sea was pretty smooth and barely tired us . sometimes i tried to peer through the dense gloom , which was broken only by the phosphorescent flickers coming from our movements . i stared at the luminous ripples breaking over my hands , shimmering sheets spattered with blotches of bluish gray . it seemed as if we 'd plunged into a pool of quicksilver .
near one o'clock in the morning , i was overcome with tremendous exhaustion . my limbs stiffened in the grip of intense cramps . conseil had to keep me going , and attending to our self - preservation became his sole responsibility . i soon heard the poor lad gasping ; his breathing became shallow and quick . i did n't think he could stand such exertions for much longer .
" go on ! go on ! " i told him .
" leave master behind ? " he replied . " never ! i 'll drown before he does ! "
" help ! help ! "
" did you hear that ? " i muttered .
" yes , yes ! "
and conseil hurled another desperate plea into space .
this time there could be no mistake ! a human voice had answered us ! was it the voice of some poor devil left behind in midocean , some other victim of that collision suffered by our ship ? or was it one of the frigate 's longboats , hailing us out of the gloom ?
conseil made one final effort , and bracing his hands on my shoulders , while i offered resistance with one supreme exertion , he raised himself half out of the water , then fell back exhausted .
" what did you see ? "
what had he seen ? then , lord knows why , the thought of the monster came into my head for the first time . . . ! but even so , that voice . . . ? gone are the days when jonahs took refuge in the bellies of whales !
nevertheless , conseil kept towing me . sometimes he looked up , stared straight ahead , and shouted a request for directions , which was answered by a voice that was getting closer and closer . i could barely hear it . i was at the end of my strength ; my fingers gave out ; my hands were no help to me ; my mouth opened convulsively , filling with brine ; its coldness ran through me ; i raised my head one last time , then i collapsed . . . .
just then something hard banged against me . i clung to it . then i felt myself being pulled upward , back to the surface of the water ; my chest caved in , and i fainted . . . .
" conseil ! " i muttered .
" did master ring for me ? " conseil replied .
just then , in the last light of a moon settling on the horizon , i spotted a face that was n't conseil 's but which i recognized at once .
" ned ! " i exclaimed .
" in person , sir , and still after his prize ! " the canadian replied .
" you were thrown overboard after the frigate 's collision ? "
" yes , professor , but i was luckier than you , and right away i was able to set foot on this floating islet . "
" islet ? "
" or in other words , on our gigantic narwhale . "
" explain yourself , ned . "
" it 's just that i soon realized why my harpoon got blunted and could n't puncture its hide . "
" why , ned , why ? "
" because , professor , this beast is made of boilerplate steel ! "
the canadian 's last words caused a sudden upheaval in my brain . i swiftly hoisted myself to the summit of this half - submerged creature or object that was serving as our refuge . i tested it with my foot . obviously it was some hard , impenetrable substance , not the soft matter that makes up the bodies of our big marine mammals .
but this hard substance could have been a bony carapace , like those that covered some prehistoric animals , and i might have left it at that and classified this monster among such amphibious reptiles as turtles or alligators .
well , no . the blackish back supporting me was smooth and polished with no overlapping scales . on impact , it gave off a metallic sonority , and as incredible as this sounds , it seemed , i swear , to be made of riveted plates .
no doubts were possible ! this animal , this monster , this natural phenomenon that had puzzled the whole scientific world , that had muddled and misled the minds of seamen in both hemispheres , was , there could be no escaping it , an even more astonishing phenomenon-- a phenomenon made by the hand of man .
but there was no question now . we were stretched out on the back of some kind of underwater boat that , as far as i could judge , boasted the shape of an immense steel fish . ned land had clear views on the issue . conseil and i could only line up behind him .
" but then , " i said , " does this contraption contain some sort of locomotive mechanism , and a crew to run it ? "
" apparently , " the harpooner replied . " and yet for the three hours i 've lived on this floating island , it has n't shown a sign of life . "
" this boat has n't moved at all ? "
" no , professor aronnax . it just rides with the waves , but otherwise it has n't stirred . "
" but we know that it 's certainly gifted with great speed . now then , since an engine is needed to generate that speed , and a mechanic to run that engine , i conclude : we 're saved . "
" humph ! " ned land put in , his tone denoting reservations .
just then , as if to take my side in the argument , a bubbling began astern of this strange submersible -- whose drive mechanism was obviously a propeller -- and the boat started to move . we barely had time to hang on to its topside , which emerged about eighty centimeters above water . fortunately its speed was not excessive .
" so long as it navigates horizontally , " ned land muttered , " i 've no complaints . but if it gets the urge to dive , i would n't give $ 2.00 for my hide ! "
the canadian might have quoted a much lower price . so it was imperative to make contact with whatever beings were confined inside the plating of this machine . i searched its surface for an opening or a hatch , a " manhole , " to use the official term ; but the lines of rivets had been firmly driven into the sheet - iron joins and were straight and uniform .
moreover , the moon then disappeared and left us in profound darkness . we had to wait for daylight to find some way of getting inside this underwater boat .
so our salvation lay totally in the hands of the mysterious helmsmen steering this submersible , and if it made a dive , we were done for ! but aside from this occurring , i did n't doubt the possibility of our making contact with them . in fact , if they did n't produce their own air , they inevitably had to make periodic visits to the surface of the ocean to replenish their oxygen supply . hence the need for some opening that put the boat 's interior in contact with the atmosphere .
as for any hope of being rescued by commander farragut , that had to be renounced completely . we were being swept westward , and i estimate that our comparatively moderate speed reached twelve miles per hour . the propeller churned the waves with mathematical regularity , sometimes emerging above the surface and throwing phosphorescent spray to great heights .
near four o'clock in the morning , the submersible picked up speed . we could barely cope with this dizzying rush , and the waves battered us at close range . fortunately ned 's hands came across a big mooring ring fastened to the topside of this sheet - iron back , and we all held on for dear life .
finally this long night was over . my imperfect memories wo n't let me recall my every impression of it . a single detail comes back to me . several times , during various lulls of wind and sea , i thought i heard indistinct sounds , a sort of elusive harmony produced by distant musical chords . what was the secret behind this underwater navigating , whose explanation the whole world had sought in vain ? what beings lived inside this strange boat ? what mechanical force allowed it to move about with such prodigious speed ?
daylight appeared . the morning mists surrounded us , but they soon broke up . i was about to proceed with a careful examination of the hull , whose topside formed a sort of horizontal platform , when i felt it sinking little by little .
" oh , damnation ! " ned land shouted , stamping his foot on the resonant sheet iron . " open up there , you antisocial navigators ! "
but it was difficult to make yourself heard above the deafening beats of the propeller . fortunately this submerging movement stopped .
from inside the boat , there suddenly came noises of iron fastenings pushed roughly aside . one of the steel plates flew up , a man appeared , gave a bizarre yell , and instantly disappeared .
a few moments later , eight strapping fellows appeared silently , their faces like masks , and dragged us down into their fearsome machine .
chapter 8
" mobilis in mobili "
the narrow hatch had barely closed over me when i was surrounded by profound darkness . saturated with the outside light , my eyes could n't make out a thing . i felt my naked feet clinging to the steps of an iron ladder . forcibly seized , ned land and conseil were behind me . at the foot of the ladder , a door opened and instantly closed behind us with a loud clang .
we were alone . where ? i could n't say , could barely even imagine . all was darkness , but such utter darkness that after several minutes , my eyes were still unable to catch a single one of those hazy gleams that drift through even the blackest nights .
meanwhile , furious at these goings on , ned land gave free rein to his indignation .
" damnation ! " he exclaimed . " these people are about as hospitable as the savages of new caledonia ! all that 's lacking is for them to be cannibals ! i would n't be surprised if they were , but believe you me , they wo n't eat me without my kicking up a protest ! "
" calm yourself , ned my friend , " conseil replied serenely . " do n't flare up so quickly ! we are n't in a kettle yet ! "
" in a kettle , no , " the canadian shot back , " but in an oven for sure . it 's dark enough for one . luckily my bowie knife has n't left me , and i can still see well enough to put it to use . the first one of these bandits who lays a hand on me-- "
i started moving , groping my way . after five steps i encountered an iron wall made of riveted boilerplate . then , turning around , i bumped into a wooden table next to which several stools had been set . the floor of this prison lay hidden beneath thick , hempen matting that deadened the sound of footsteps . its naked walls did n't reveal any trace of a door or window . going around the opposite way , conseil met up with me , and we returned to the middle of this cabin , which had to be twenty feet long by ten wide . as for its height , not even ned land , with his great stature , was able to determine it .
half an hour had already gone by without our situation changing , when our eyes were suddenly spirited from utter darkness into blinding light . our prison lit up all at once ; in other words , it filled with luminescent matter so intense that at first i could n't stand the brightness of it . from its glare and whiteness , i recognized the electric glow that had played around this underwater boat like some magnificent phosphorescent phenomenon . after involuntarily closing my eyes , i reopened them and saw that this luminous force came from a frosted half globe curving out of the cabin 's ceiling .
" finally ! it 's light enough to see ! " ned land exclaimed , knife in hand , staying on the defensive .
" yes , " i replied , then ventured the opposite view . " but as for our situation , we 're still in the dark . "
" master must learn patience , " said the emotionless conseil .
this sudden illumination of our cabin enabled me to examine its tiniest details . it contained only a table and five stools . its invisible door must have been hermetically sealed . not a sound reached our ears . everything seemed dead inside this boat . was it in motion , or stationary on the surface of the ocean , or sinking into the depths ? i could n't tell .
but this luminous globe had n't been turned on without good reason . consequently , i hoped that some crewmen would soon make an appearance . if you want to consign people to oblivion , you do n't light up their dungeons .
i was not mistaken . unlocking noises became audible , a door opened , and two men appeared .
i felt " involuntarily reassured " in his presence , and this boded well for our interview .
wearing caps made of sea - otter fur , and shod in sealskin fishing boots , these two strangers were dressed in clothing made from some unique fabric that flattered the figure and allowed great freedom of movement .
the taller of the two -- apparently the leader on board -- examined us with the greatest care but without pronouncing a word . then , turning to his companion , he conversed with him in a language i did n't recognize . it was a sonorous , harmonious , flexible dialect whose vowels seemed to undergo a highly varied accentuation .
the other replied with a shake of the head and added two or three utterly incomprehensible words . then he seemed to question me directly with a long stare .
i replied in clear french that i was n't familiar with his language ; but he did n't seem to understand me , and the situation grew rather baffling .
" still , master should tell our story , " conseil said to me . " perhaps these gentlemen will grasp a few words of it ! "
i tried again , telling the tale of our adventures , clearly articulating my every syllable , and not leaving out a single detail . i stated our names and titles ; then , in order , i introduced professor aronnax , his manservant conseil , and mr . ned land , harpooner .
the man with calm , gentle eyes listened to me serenely , even courteously , and paid remarkable attention . but nothing in his facial expression indicated that he understood my story . when i finished , he did n't pronounce a single word .
one resource still left was to speak english . perhaps they would be familiar with this nearly universal language . but i only knew it , as i did the german language , well enough to read it fluently , not well enough to speak it correctly . here , however , our overriding need was to make ourselves understood .
ned needed no persuading and started our story all over again , most of which i could follow . its content was the same , but the form differed . carried away by his volatile temperament , the canadian put great animation into it . he complained vehemently about being imprisoned in defiance of his civil rights , asked by virtue of which law he was hereby detained , invoked writs of habeas corpus , threatened to press charges against anyone holding him in illegal custody , ranted , gesticulated , shouted , and finally conveyed by an expressive gesture that we were dying of hunger .
this was perfectly true , but we had nearly forgotten the fact .
much to his amazement , the harpooner seemed no more intelligible than i had been . our visitors did n't bat an eye . apparently they were engineers who understood the languages of neither the french physicist arago nor the english physicist faraday .
thoroughly baffled after vainly exhausting our philological resources , i no longer knew what tactic to pursue , when conseil told me :
" if master will authorize me , i 'll tell the whole business in german . "
" what ! you know german ? " i exclaimed .
" like most flemish people , with all due respect to master . "
" on the contrary , my respect is due you . go to it , my boy . "
and conseil , in his serene voice , described for the third time the various vicissitudes of our story . but despite our narrator 's fine accent and stylish turns of phrase , the german language met with no success .
finally , as a last resort , i hauled out everything i could remember from my early schooldays , and i tried to narrate our adventures in latin . cicero would have plugged his ears and sent me to the scullery , but somehow i managed to pull through . with the same negative result .
this last attempt ultimately misfiring , the two strangers exchanged a few words in their incomprehensible language and withdrew , not even favoring us with one of those encouraging gestures that are used in every country in the world . the door closed again .
" this is outrageous ! " ned land shouted , exploding for the twentieth time . " i ask you ! we speak french , english , german , and latin to these rogues , and neither of them has the decency to even answer back ! "
" calm down , ned , " i told the seething harpooner . " anger wo n't get us anywhere . "
" but professor , " our irascible companion went on , " ca n't you see that we could die of hunger in this iron cage ? "
" bah ! " conseil put in philosophically . " we can hold out a good while yet ! "
" my friends , " i said , " we must n't despair . we 've gotten out of tighter spots . so please do me the favor of waiting a bit before you form your views on the commander and crew of this boat . "
" my views are fully formed , " ned land shot back . " they 're rogues ! "
" oh good ! and from what country ? "
" roguedom ! "
" that 's the nuisance in not knowing every language , " conseil replied , " or the drawback in not having one universal language ! "
" which would all go out the window ! " ned land replied . " do n't you see , these people have a language all to themselves , a language they 've invented just to cause despair in decent people who ask for a little dinner ! why , in every country on earth , when you open your mouth , snap your jaws , smack your lips and teeth , is n't that the world 's most understandable message ? from quebec to the tuamotu islands , from paris to the antipodes , does n't it mean : i 'm hungry , give me a bite to eat ! "
" oh , " conseil put in , " there are some people so unintelligent by nature . . . "
as he was saying these words , the door opened . a steward entered . he brought us some clothes , jackets and sailor 's pants , made out of a fabric whose nature i did n't recognize . i hurried to change into them , and my companions followed suit .
meanwhile our silent steward , perhaps a deaf - mute , set the table and laid three place settings .
" there 's something serious afoot , " conseil said , " and it bodes well . "
" bah ! " replied the rancorous harpooner . " what the devil do you suppose they eat around here ? turtle livers , loin of shark , dogfish steaks ? "
" we 'll soon find out ! " conseil said .
mobilis in mobili n moving within the moving element ! it was a highly appropriate motto for this underwater machine , so long as the preposition in is translated as within and not upon . the letter n was no doubt the initial of the name of that mystifying individual in command beneath the seas !
but all earthly things come to an end , all things must pass , even the hunger of people who have n't eaten for fifteen hours . our appetites appeased , we felt an urgent need for sleep . a natural reaction after that interminable night of fighting for our lives .
" ye gods , i 'll sleep soundly , " conseil said .
chapter 9
the tantrums of ned land
i have no idea how long this slumber lasted ; but it must have been a good while , since we were completely over our exhaustion . i was the first one to wake up . my companions were n't yet stirring and still lay in their corners like inanimate objects .
nothing had changed in its interior arrangements . the prison was still a prison and its prisoners still prisoners . but , taking advantage of our slumber , the steward had cleared the table . consequently , nothing indicated any forthcoming improvement in our situation , and i seriously wondered if we were doomed to spend the rest of our lives in this cage .
so it was now urgent to renew the air in our prison , and no doubt the air in this whole underwater boat as well .
here a question popped into my head . how did the commander of this aquatic residence go about it ? did he obtain air using chemical methods , releasing the oxygen contained in potassium chlorate by heating it , meanwhile absorbing the carbon dioxide with potassium hydroxide ? if so , he would have to keep up some kind of relationship with the shore , to come by the materials needed for such an operation . did he simply limit himself to storing the air in high - pressure tanks and then dispense it according to his crew 's needs ? perhaps . or , proceeding in a more convenient , more economical , and consequently more probable fashion , was he satisfied with merely returning to breathe at the surface of the water like a cetacean , renewing his oxygen supply every twenty - four hours ? in any event , whatever his method was , it seemed prudent to me that he use this method without delay .
in fact , i had already resorted to speeding up my inhalations in order to extract from the cell what little oxygen it contained , when suddenly i was refreshed by a current of clean air , scented with a salty aroma . it had to be a sea breeze , life - giving and charged with iodine ! i opened my mouth wide , and my lungs glutted themselves on the fresh particles . at the same time , i felt a swaying , a rolling of moderate magnitude but definitely noticeable . this boat , this sheet - iron monster , had obviously just risen to the surface of the ocean , there to breathe in good whale fashion . so the ship 's mode of ventilation was finally established .
when i had absorbed a chestful of this clean air , i looked for the conduit -- the " air carrier , " if you prefer -- that allowed this beneficial influx to reach us , and i soon found it . above the door opened an air vent that let in a fresh current of oxygen , renewing the thin air in our cell .
i had gotten to this point in my observations when ned and conseil woke up almost simultaneously , under the influence of this reviving air purification . they rubbed their eyes , stretched their arms , and sprang to their feet .
" did master sleep well ? " conseil asked me with his perennial good manners .
" like a log , professor . but i must be imagining things , because it seems like i 'm breathing a sea breeze ! "
a seaman could n't be wrong on this topic , and i told the canadian what had gone on while he slept .
" good ! " he said . " that explains perfectly all that bellowing we heard , when our so - called narwhale lay in sight of the abraham lincoln . "
" perfectly , mr . land . it was catching its breath ! "
" dinnertime , my fine harpooner ? i 'd say at least breakfast time , because we 've certainly woken up to a new day . "
" which indicates , " conseil replied , " that we 've spent twenty - four hours in slumber . "
" that 's my assessment , " i replied .
" i wo n't argue with you , " ned land answered . " but dinner or breakfast , that steward will be plenty welcome whether he brings the one or the other . "
" the one and the other , " conseil said .
" well put , " the canadian replied . " we deserve two meals , and speaking for myself , i 'll do justice to them both . "
" all right , ned , let 's wait and see ! " i replied . " it 's clear that these strangers do n't intend to let us die of hunger , otherwise last evening 's dinner would n't make any sense . "
" unless they 're fattening us up ! " ned shot back .
" i object , " i replied . " we have not fallen into the hands of cannibals . "
" get rid of those ideas , mr . land , " i answered the harpooner . " and above all , do n't let them lead you to flare up against our hosts , which would only make our situation worse . "
" anyhow , " the harpooner said , " i 'm as hungry as all hades , and dinner or breakfast , not one puny meal has arrived ! "
" mr . land , " i answered , " we have to adapt to the schedule on board , and i imagine our stomachs are running ahead of the chief cook 's dinner bell . "
" well then , we 'll adjust our stomachs to the chef 's timetable ! " conseil replied serenely .
" what good would it do ? " conseil asked .
" complaining does n't have to do good , it just feels good ! and if these pirates -- i say pirates out of consideration for the professor 's feelings , since he does n't want us to call them cannibals-- if these pirates think they 're going to smother me in this cage without hearing what cusswords spice up my outbursts , they 've got another think coming ! look here , professor aronnax , speak frankly . how long do you figure they 'll keep us in this iron box ? "
" to tell the truth , friend land , i know little more about it than you do . "
" but in a nutshell , what do you suppose is going on ? "
" unless they recruit us to serve on the crew , " conseil said , " and keep us here-- "
" well thought out , mr . land , " i replied . " but as yet , i do n't believe we 've been tendered any enlistment offers . consequently , it 's pointless to argue about what tactics we should pursue in such a case . i repeat : let 's wait , let 's be guided by events , and let 's do nothing , since right now there 's nothing we can do . "
" on the contrary , professor , " the harpooner replied , not wanting to give in . " there is something we can do . "
" oh ? and what , mr . land ? "
" break out of here ! "
" breaking out of a prison on shore is difficult enough , but with an underwater prison , it strikes me as completely unworkable . "
" come now , ned my friend , " conseil asked , " how would you answer master 's objection ? i refuse to believe that an american is at the end of his tether . "
visibly baffled , the harpooner said nothing . under the conditions in which fate had left us , it was absolutely impossible to escape . but a canadian 's wit is half french , and mr . ned land made this clear in his reply .
" so , professor aronnax , " he went on after thinking for a few moments , " you have n't figured out what people do when they ca n't escape from their prison ? "
" no , my friend . "
" easy . they fix things so they stay there . "
" but we fix things by kicking out all the jailers , guards , and wardens , " ned land added .
" what 's this , ned ? " i asked . " you 'd seriously consider taking over this craft ? "
" very seriously , " the canadian replied .
" it 's impossible . "
" and why is that , sir ? some promising opportunity might come up , and i do n't see what could stop us from taking advantage of it . if there are only about twenty men on board this machine , i do n't think they can stave off two frenchmen and a canadian ! "
it seemed wiser to accept the harpooner 's proposition than to debate it . accordingly , i was content to reply :
" i have your word , ned , " i answered the canadian .
before i could make a single movement to prevent him , the canadian rushed at the poor man , threw him down , held him by the throat . the steward was choking in the grip of those powerful hands .
conseil was already trying to loosen the harpooner 's hands from his half - suffocated victim , and i had gone to join in the rescue , when i was abruptly nailed to the spot by these words pronounced in french :
" calm down , mr . land ! and you , professor , kindly listen to me ! "
chapter 10 the man of the waters
it was the ship 's commander who had just spoken .
at these words ned land stood up quickly . nearly strangled , the steward staggered out at a signal from his superior ; but such was the commander 's authority aboard his vessel , not one gesture gave away the resentment that this man must have felt toward the canadian . in silence we waited for the outcome of this scene ; conseil , in spite of himself , seemed almost fascinated , i was stunned .
arms crossed , leaning against a corner of the table , the commander studied us with great care . was he reluctant to speak further ? did he regret those words he had just pronounced in french ? you would have thought so .
after a few moments of silence , which none of us would have dreamed of interrupting :
i bowed in agreement . the commander had n't put a question to me . so no answer was called for . this man expressed himself with perfect ease and without a trace of an accent . his phrasing was clear , his words well chosen , his facility in elocution remarkable . and yet , to me , he did n't have " the feel " of a fellow countryman .
he went on with the conversation as follows :
" no doubt , sir , you 've felt that i waited rather too long before paying you this second visit . after discovering your identities , i wanted to weigh carefully what policy to pursue toward you . i had great difficulty deciding . some extremely inconvenient circumstances have brought you into the presence of a man who has cut himself off from humanity . your coming has disrupted my whole existence . "
" unintentionally , " i said .
i detected a controlled irritation in these words . but there was a perfectly natural reply to these charges , and i made it .
" sir , " i said , " you 're surely unaware of the discussions that have taken place in europe and america with yourself as the subject . you do n't realize that various accidents , caused by collisions with your underwater machine , have aroused public passions on those two continents . i 'll spare you the innumerable hypotheses with which we 've tried to explain this inexplicable phenomenon , whose secret is yours alone . but please understand that the abraham lincoln chased you over the pacific high seas in the belief it was hunting some powerful marine monster , which had to be purged from the ocean at all cost . "
a half smile curled the commander 's lips ; then , in a calmer tone :
" professor aronnax , " he replied , " do you dare claim that your frigate would n't have chased and cannonaded an underwater boat as readily as a monster ? "
i kept quiet , with good reason . what was the use of debating such a proposition , when superior force can wipe out the best arguments ?
" perhaps it would be the right of a savage , " i replied . " but not that of a civilized man . "
these thoughts swiftly crossed my mind while this strange individual fell silent , like someone completely self - absorbed . i regarded him with a mixture of fear and fascination , in the same way , no doubt , that oedipus regarded the sphinx .
after a fairly long silence , the commander went on with our conversation .
" go on , sir , " i replied . " i assume this condition is one an honest man can accept ? "
so things happened on board that were quite odd to say the least , things never to be seen by people not placing themselves beyond society 's laws ! among all the surprises the future had in store for me , this would not be the mildest .
" go ahead , sir . "
" you said we 'd be free aboard your vessel ? "
" completely . "
" then i would ask what you mean by this freedom . "
it was obvious that we did not understand each other .
" pardon me , sir , " i went on , " but that 's merely the freedom that every prisoner has , the freedom to pace his cell ! that 's not enough for us . "
" nevertheless , it will have to do ! "
" what ! we must give up seeing our homeland , friends , and relatives ever again ? "
" by thunder ! " ned land shouted . " i 'll never promise i wo n't try getting out of here ! "
" i did n't ask for such a promise , mr . land , " the commander replied coldly .
" sir , " i replied , flaring up in spite of myself , " you 're taking unfair advantage of us ! this is sheer cruelty ! "
these words indicated that the commander pursued a policy impervious to arguments .
" then , sir , " i went on , " you give us , quite simply , a choice between life and death ? "
" quite simply . "
" my friends , " i said , " to a question couched in these terms , our answer can be taken for granted . but no solemn promises bind us to the commander of this vessel . "
" none , sir , " the stranger replied .
then , in a gentler voice , he went on :
i ca n't deny it ; the commander 's words had a tremendous effect on me . he had caught me on my weak side , and i momentarily forgot that not even this sublime experience was worth the loss of my freedom . besides , i counted on the future to resolve this important question . so i was content to reply :
" sir , even though you 've cut yourself off from humanity , i can see that you have n't disowned all human feeling . we 're castaways whom you 've charitably taken aboard , we 'll never forget that . speaking for myself , i do n't rule out that the interests of science could override even the need for freedom , which promises me that , in exchange , our encounter will provide great rewards . "
i thought the commander would offer me his hand , to seal our agreement . he did nothing of the sort . i regretted that .
" one last question , " i said , just as this inexplicable being seemed ready to withdraw .
" ask it , professor . "
" by what name am i to call you ? "
" sir , " the commander replied , " to you , i 'm simply captain nemo ; to me , you and your companions are simply passengers on the nautilus . "
captain nemo called out . a steward appeared . the captain gave him his orders in that strange language i could n't even identify . then , turning to the canadian and conseil :
" a meal is waiting for you in your cabin , " he told them . " kindly follow this man . "
" that 's an offer i ca n't refuse ! " the harpooner replied . after being confined for over thirty hours , he and conseil were finally out of this cell .
" and now , professor aronnax , our own breakfast is ready . allow me to lead the way . "
" yours to command , captain . "
i then entered a dining room , decorated and furnished in austere good taste . inlaid with ebony trim , tall oaken sideboards stood at both ends of this room , and sparkling on their shelves were staggered rows of earthenware , porcelain , and glass of incalculable value . there silver - plated dinnerware gleamed under rays pouring from light fixtures in the ceiling , whose glare was softened and tempered by delicately painted designs .
in the center of this room stood a table , richly spread . captain nemo indicated the place i was to occupy .
" be seated , " he told me , " and eat like the famished man you must be . "
our breakfast consisted of several dishes whose contents were all supplied by the sea , and some foods whose nature and derivation were unknown to me . they were good , i admit , but with a peculiar flavor to which i would soon grow accustomed . these various food items seemed to be rich in phosphorous , and i thought that they , too , must have been of marine origin .
captain nemo stared at me . i had asked him nothing , but he read my thoughts , and on his own he answered the questions i was itching to address him .
" most of these dishes are new to you , " he told me . " but you can consume them without fear . they 're healthy and nourishing . i renounced terrestrial foods long ago , and i 'm none the worse for it . my crew are strong and full of energy , and they eat what i eat . "
" so , " i said , " all these foods are products of the sea ? "
" yes , professor , the sea supplies all my needs . sometimes i cast my nets in our wake , and i pull them up ready to burst . sometimes i go hunting right in the midst of this element that has long seemed so far out of man 's reach , and i corner the game that dwells in my underwater forests . like the flocks of old proteus , king neptune 's shepherd , my herds graze without fear on the ocean 's immense prairies . there i own vast properties that i harvest myself , and which are forever sown by the hand of the creator of all things . "
i stared at captain nemo in definite astonishment , and i answered him :
" sir , i understand perfectly how your nets can furnish excellent fish for your table ; i understand less how you can chase aquatic game in your underwater forests ; but how a piece of red meat , no matter how small , can figure in your menu , that i do n't understand at all . "
" nor i , sir , " captain nemo answered me . " i never touch the flesh of land animals . "
" nevertheless , this . . . , " i went on , pointing to a dish where some slices of loin were still left .
" what you believe to be red meat , professor , is nothing other than loin of sea turtle . similarly , here are some dolphin livers you might mistake for stewed pork . my chef is a skillful food processor who excels at pickling and preserving these various exhibits from the ocean . feel free to sample all of these foods . here are some preserves of sea cucumber that a malaysian would declare to be unrivaled in the entire world , here 's cream from milk furnished by the udders of cetaceans , and sugar from the huge fucus plants in the north sea ; and finally , allow me to offer you some marmalade of sea anemone , equal to that from the tastiest fruits . "
so i sampled away , more as a curiosity seeker than an epicure , while captain nemo delighted me with his incredible anecdotes .
" you love the sea , captain . "
" now , professor , " he said , " if you 'd like to inspect the nautilus , i 'm yours to command . "
chapter 11 the nautilus
captain nemo stood up . i followed him . contrived at the rear of the dining room , a double door opened , and i entered a room whose dimensions equaled the one i had just left .
it was a library . tall , black - rosewood bookcases , inlaid with copperwork , held on their wide shelves a large number of uniformly bound books . these furnishings followed the contours of the room , their lower parts leading to huge couches upholstered in maroon leather and curved for maximum comfort . light , movable reading stands , which could be pushed away or pulled near as desired , allowed books to be positioned on them for easy study . in the center stood a huge table covered with pamphlets , among which some newspapers , long out of date , were visible . electric light flooded this whole harmonious totality , falling from four frosted half globes set in the scrollwork of the ceiling . i stared in genuine wonderment at this room so ingeniously laid out , and i could n't believe my eyes .
" captain nemo , " i told my host , who had just stretched out on a couch , " this is a library that would do credit to more than one continental palace , and i truly marvel to think it can go with you into the deepest seas . "
" where could one find greater silence or solitude , professor ? " captain nemo replied . " did your study at the museum afford you such a perfect retreat ? "
" no , sir , and i might add that it 's quite a humble one next to yours . you own 6,000 or 7,000 volumes here . . . "
" sir , " i told the captain , " thank you for placing this library at my disposal . there are scientific treasures here , and i 'll take advantage of them . "
" this room is n't only a library , " captain nemo said , " it 's also a smoking room . "
" a smoking room ? " i exclaimed . " then one may smoke on board ? "
" surely . "
" in that case , sir , i 'm forced to believe that you 've kept up relations with havana . "
" none whatever , " the captain replied . " try this cigar , professor aronnax , and even though it does n't come from havana , it will satisfy you if you 're a connoisseur . "
i took the cigar offered me , whose shape recalled those from cuba ; but it seemed to be made of gold leaf . i lit it at a small brazier supported by an elegant bronze stand , and i inhaled my first whiffs with the relish of a smoker who has n't had a puff in days .
" it 's excellent , " i said , " but it 's not from the tobacco plant . "
" captain , i scorn them from this day forward . "
" then smoke these cigars whenever you like , without debating their origin . they bear no government seal of approval , but i imagine they 're none the worse for it . "
" on the contrary . "
just then captain nemo opened a door facing the one by which i had entered the library , and i passed into an immense , splendidly lit lounge .
some thirty pictures by the masters , uniformly framed and separated by gleaming panoplies of arms , adorned walls on which were stretched tapestries of austere design . there i saw canvases of the highest value , the likes of which i had marveled at in private european collections and art exhibitions . the various schools of the old masters were represented by a raphael madonna , a virgin by leonardo da vinci , a nymph by correggio , a woman by titian , an adoration of the magi by veronese , an assumption of the virgin by murillo , a holbein portrait , a monk by velazquez , a martyr by ribera , a village fair by rubens , two flemish landscapes by teniers , three little genre paintings by gerard dow , metsu , and paul potter , two canvases by gericault and prud'hon , plus seascapes by backhuysen and vernet . among the works of modern art were pictures signed by delacroix , ingres , decamps , troyon , meissonier , daubigny , etc . , and some wonderful miniature statues in marble or bronze , modeled after antiquity 's finest originals , stood on their pedestals in the corners of this magnificent museum . as the nautilus 's commander had predicted , my mind was already starting to fall into that promised state of stunned amazement .
" professor , " this strange man then said , " you must excuse the informality with which i receive you , and the disorder reigning in this lounge . "
" sir , " i replied , " without prying into who you are , might i venture to identify you as an artist ? "
" a collector , sir , nothing more . formerly i loved acquiring these beautiful works created by the hand of man . i sought them greedily , ferreted them out tirelessly , and i 've been able to gather some objects of great value . they 're my last mementos of those shores that are now dead for me . in my eyes , your modern artists are already as old as the ancients . they 've existed for 2,000 or 3,000 years , and i mix them up in my mind . the masters are ageless . "
" what about these composers ? " i said , pointing to sheet music by weber , rossini , mozart , beethoven , haydn , meyerbeer , hrold , wagner , auber , gounod , victor mass , and a number of others scattered over a full size piano - organ , which occupied one of the wall panels in this lounge .
captain nemo fell silent and seemed lost in reverie . i regarded him with intense excitement , silently analyzing his strange facial expression . leaning his elbow on the corner of a valuable mosaic table , he no longer saw me , he had forgotten my very presence .
i did n't disturb his meditations but continued to pass in review the curiosities that enriched this lounge .
after the works of art , natural rarities predominated . they consisted chiefly of plants , shells , and other exhibits from the ocean that must have been captain nemo 's own personal finds . in the middle of the lounge , a jet of water , electrically lit , fell back into a basin made from a single giant clam . the delicately festooned rim of this shell , supplied by the biggest mollusk in the class acephala , measured about six meters in circumference ; so it was even bigger than those fine giant clams given to king franois i by the republic of venice , and which the church of saint - sulpice in paris has made into two gigantic holy - water fonts .
around this basin , inside elegant glass cases fastened with copper bands , there were classified and labeled the most valuable marine exhibits ever put before the eyes of a naturalist . my professorial glee may easily be imagined .
consequently , to calculate the value of this collection was , i should say , impossible . captain nemo must have spent millions in acquiring these different specimens , and i was wondering what financial resources he tapped to satisfy his collector 's fancies , when these words interrupted me :
" you 're examining my shells , professor ? they 're indeed able to fascinate a naturalist ; but for me they have an added charm , since i 've collected every one of them with my own two hands , and not a sea on the globe has escaped my investigations . "
" professor aronnax , " captain nemo answered me , " i 've said you 'd be free aboard my vessel , so no part of the nautilus is off - limits to you . you may inspect it in detail , and i 'll be delighted to act as your guide . "
" i do n't know how to thank you , sir , but i wo n't abuse your good nature . i would only ask you about the uses intended for these instruments of physical measure-- "
" professor , these same instruments are found in my stateroom , where i 'll have the pleasure of explaining their functions to you . but beforehand , come inspect the cabin set aside for you . you need to learn how you 'll be lodged aboard the nautilus . "
i followed captain nemo , who , via one of the doors cut into the lounge 's canted corners , led me back down the ship 's gangways . he took me to the bow , and there i found not just a cabin but an elegant stateroom with a bed , a washstand , and various other furnishings .
i could only thank my host .
captain nemo showed me to a bench .
" kindly be seated , " he told me .
i sat , and he began speaking as follows :
chapter 12
everything through electricity
" sir , " captain nemo said , showing me the instruments hanging on the walls of his stateroom , " these are the devices needed to navigate the nautilus . here , as in the lounge , i always have them before my eyes , and they indicate my position and exact heading in the midst of the ocean . you 're familiar with some of them , such as the thermometer , which gives the temperature inside the nautilus ; the barometer , which measures the heaviness of the outside air and forecasts changes in the weather ; the humidistat , which indicates the degree of dryness in the atmosphere ; the storm glass , whose mixture decomposes to foretell the arrival of tempests ; the compass , which steers my course ; the sextant , which takes the sun 's altitude and tells me my latitude ; chronometers , which allow me to calculate my longitude ; and finally , spyglasses for both day and night , enabling me to scrutinize every point of the horizon once the nautilus has risen to the surface of the waves . "
" these are the normal navigational instruments , " i replied , " and i 'm familiar with their uses . but no doubt these others answer pressing needs unique to the nautilus . that dial i see there , with the needle moving across it -- isn't it a pressure gauge ? "
" and these are some new breed of sounding line ? "
" they 're thermometric sounding lines that report water temperatures in the different strata . "
" and these other instruments , whose functions i ca n't even guess ? "
" here , professor , i need to give you some background information , " captain nemo said . " so kindly hear me out . "
he fell silent for some moments , then he said :
" electricity ! " i exclaimed in some surprise .
" yes , sir . "
" the sea itself ? "
" yes , professor , and there was no shortage of such sources . in fact , by establishing a circuit between two wires immersed to different depths , i 'd be able to obtain electricity through the diverging temperatures they experience ; but i preferred to use a more practical procedure . "
" and that is ? "
" sodium ? "
" yes , sir . mixed with mercury , it forms an amalgam that takes the place of zinc in bunsen cells . the mercury is never depleted . only the sodium is consumed , and the sea itself gives me that . beyond this , i 'll mention that sodium batteries have been found to generate the greater energy , and their electro - motor strength is twice that of zinc batteries . "
" accordingly , professor , i do n't extract it with batteries ; quite simply , i utilize the heat of coal from the earth . "
" we 'll say coal from the seafloor , if you prefer , " captain nemo replied .
" and you can mine these veins of underwater coal ? "
" you 'll watch me work them , professor aronnax . i ask only a little patience of you , since you 'll have ample time to be patient . just remember one thing : i owe everything to the ocean ; it generates electricity , and electricity gives the nautilus heat , light , motion , and , in a word , life itself . "
" but not the air you breathe ? "
" captain , " i replied , " i 'll rest content with marveling . you 've obviously found what all mankind will surely find one day , the true dynamic power of electricity . "
" i 'm not so certain they 'll find it , " captain nemo replied icily . " but be that as it may , you 're already familiar with the first use i 've found for this valuable force . it lights us , and with a uniformity and continuity not even possessed by sunlight . now , look at that clock : it 's electric , it runs with an accuracy rivaling the finest chronometers . i 've had it divided into twenty - four hours like italian clocks , since neither day nor night , sun nor moon , exist for me , but only this artificial light that i import into the depths of the seas ! see , right now it 's ten o'clock in the morning . "
" that 's perfect . "
" another use for electricity : that dial hanging before our eyes indicates how fast the nautilus is going . an electric wire puts it in contact with the patent log ; this needle shows me the actual speed of my submersible . and . . . hold on . . . just now we 're proceeding at the moderate pace of fifteen miles per hour . "
" it 's marvelous , " i replied , " and i truly see , captain , how right you are to use this force ; it 's sure to take the place of wind , water , and steam . "
" but that 's not all , professor aronnax , " captain nemo said , standing up . " and if you 'd care to follow me , we 'll inspect the nautilus 's stern . "
in essence , i was already familiar with the whole forward part of this underwater boat , and here are its exact subdivisions going from amidships to its spur : the dining room , 5 meters long and separated from the library by a watertight bulkhead , in other words , it could n't be penetrated by the sea ; the library , 5 meters long ; the main lounge , 10 meters long , separated from the captain 's stateroom by a second watertight bulkhead ; the aforesaid stateroom , 5 meters long ; mine , 2.5 meters long ; and finally , air tanks 7.5 meters long and extending to the stempost . total : a length of 35 meters . doors were cut into the watertight bulkheads and were shut hermetically by means of india - rubber seals , which insured complete safety aboard the nautilus in the event of a leak in any one section .
i followed captain nemo down gangways located for easy transit , and i arrived amidships . there i found a sort of shaft heading upward between two watertight bulkheads . an iron ladder , clamped to the wall , led to the shaft 's upper end . i asked the captain what this ladder was for .
" it goes to the skiff , " he replied .
" what ! you have a skiff ? " i replied in some astonishment .
" surely . an excellent longboat , light and unsinkable , which is used for excursions and fishing trips . "
" but when you want to set out , do n't you have to return to the surface of the sea ? "
" but how do you return to the ship ? "
" i do n't , professor aronnax ; the nautilus returns to me . "
" at your command ? "
" at my command . an electric wire connects me to the ship . i fire off a telegram , and that 's that . "
" right , " i said , tipsy from all these wonders , " nothing to it ! "
after passing the well of the companionway that led to the platform , i saw a cabin 2 meters long in which conseil and ned land , enraptured with their meal , were busy devouring it to the last crumb . then a door opened into the galley , 3 meters long and located between the vessel 's huge storage lockers .
at the far end stood a fourth watertight bulkhead , separating the crew 's quarters from the engine room . a door opened , and i stood in the compartment where captain nemo , indisputably a world - class engineer , had set up his locomotive equipment .
brightly lit , the engine room measured at least 20 meters in length . it was divided , by function , into two parts : the first contained the cells for generating electricity , the second that mechanism transmitting movement to the propeller .
right off , i detected an odor permeating the compartment that was sui generis . captain nemo noticed the negative impression it made on me .
meanwhile i examined the nautilus 's engine with a fascination easy to imagine .
" you observe , " captain nemo told me , " that i use bunsen cells , not ruhmkorff cells . the latter would be ineffectual . one uses fewer bunsen cells , but they 're big and strong , and experience has proven their superiority . the electricity generated here makes its way to the stern , where electromagnets of huge size activate a special system of levers and gears that transmit movement to the propeller 's shaft . the latter has a diameter of 6 meters , a pitch of 7.5 meters , and can do up to 120 revolutions per minute . "
" and that gives you ? "
" a speed of fifty miles per hour . "
there lay a mystery , but i did n't insist on exploring it . how could electricity work with such power ? where did this nearly unlimited energy originate ? was it in the extraordinary voltage obtained from some new kind of induction coil ? could its transmission have been immeasurably increased by some unknown system of levers ? this was the point i could n't grasp .
chapter 13
some figures
a moment later we were seated on a couch in the lounge , cigars between our lips . the captain placed before my eyes a working drawing that gave the ground plan , cross section , and side view of the nautilus . then he began his description as follows :
" here , professor aronnax , are the different dimensions of this boat now transporting you . it 's a very long cylinder with conical ends . it noticeably takes the shape of a cigar , a shape already adopted in london for several projects of the same kind . the length of this cylinder from end to end is exactly seventy meters , and its maximum breadth of beam is eight meters . so it is n't quite built on the ten - to - one ratio of your high - speed steamers ; but its lines are sufficiently long , and their tapering gradual enough , so that the displaced water easily slips past and poses no obstacle to the ship 's movements .
" these two dimensions allow you to obtain , via a simple calculation , the surface area and volume of the nautilus . its surface area totals 1,011.45 square meters , its volume 1,507.2 cubic meters-- which is tantamount to saying that when it 's completely submerged , it displaces 1,500 cubic meters of water , or weighs 1,500 metric tons .
" clear , " i replied .
" fine , captain , but now we come to a genuine difficulty . you 're able to lie flush with the surface of the ocean , that i understand . but lower down , while diving beneath that surface , is n't your submersible going to encounter a pressure , and consequently undergo an upward thrust , that must be assessed at one atmosphere per every thirty feet of water , hence at about one kilogram per each square centimeter ? "
" precisely , sir . "
" then unless you fill up the whole nautilus , i do n't see how you can force it down into the heart of these liquid masses . "
" i 'm all ears , captain . "
" when i wanted to determine what increase in weight the nautilus needed to be given in order to submerge , i had only to take note of the proportionate reduction in volume that salt water experiences in deeper and deeper strata . "
" that 's obvious , " i replied .
" that 's all ? "
this logic , backed up by figures , left me without a single objection .
" what 's that , sir ? "
" when you 're at a depth of 1,000 meters , the nautilus 's plating bears a pressure of 100 atmospheres . if at this point you want to empty the supplementary ballast tanks in order to lighten your boat and rise to the surface , your pumps must overcome that pressure of 100 atmospheres , which is 100 kilograms per each square centimeter . this demands a strength-- "
" what are they , captain ? " i asked .
" here i 'm naturally led into telling you how the nautilus is maneuvered . "
" i ca n't wait to find out . "
" in order to steer this boat to port or starboard , in short , to make turns on a horizontal plane , i use an ordinary , wide - bladed rudder that 's fastened to the rear of the sternpost and worked by a wheel and tackle . but i can also move the nautilus upward and downward on a vertical plane by the simple method of slanting its two fins , which are attached to its sides at its center of flotation ; these fins are flexible , able to assume any position , and can be operated from inside by means of powerful levers . if these fins stay parallel with the boat , the latter moves horizontally . if they slant , the nautilus follows the angle of that slant and , under its propeller 's thrust , either sinks on a diagonal as steep as it suits me , or rises on that diagonal . and similarly , if i want to return more swiftly to the surface , i throw the propeller in gear , and the water 's pressure makes the nautilus rise vertically , as an air balloon inflated with hydrogen lifts swiftly into the skies . "
" bravo , captain ! " i exclaimed . " but in the midst of the waters , how can your helmsman follow the course you 've given him ? "
" my helmsman is stationed behind the windows of a pilothouse , which protrudes from the topside of the nautilus 's hull and is fitted with biconvex glass . "
" is glass capable of resisting such pressures ? "
" fair enough , captain , but if we 're going to see , we need light to drive away the dark , and in the midst of the murky waters , i wonder how your helmsman can-- "
" set astern of the pilothouse is a powerful electric reflector whose rays light up the sea for a distance of half a mile . "
" oh , bravo ! bravo three times over , captain ! that explains the phosphorescent glow from this so - called narwhale that so puzzled us scientists ! pertinent to this , i 'll ask you if the nautilus 's running afoul of the scotia , which caused such a great uproar , was the result of an accidental encounter ? "
" entirely accidental , sir . i was navigating two meters beneath the surface of the water when the collision occurred . however , i could see that it had no dire consequences . "
" none , sir . but as for your encounter with the abraham lincoln . . . ? "
" ah , commander , " i exclaimed with conviction , " your nautilus is truly a marvelous boat ! "
captain nemo spoke with winning eloquence . the fire in his eyes and the passion in his gestures transfigured him . yes , he loved his ship the same way a father loves his child !
but one question , perhaps indiscreet , naturally popped up , and i could n't resist asking it .
" you 're an engineer , then , captain nemo ? "
" yes , professor , " he answered me . " i studied in london , paris , and new york back in the days when i was a resident of the earth 's continents . "
" but how were you able to build this wonderful nautilus in secret ? "
" each part of it , professor aronnax , came from a different spot on the globe and reached me at a cover address . its keel was forged by creusot in france , its propeller shaft by pen & co. in london , the sheet - iron plates for its hull by laird 's in liverpool , its propeller by scott 's in glasgow . its tanks were manufactured by cail & co. in paris , its engine by krupp in prussia , its spur by the motala workshops in sweden , its precision instruments by hart bros . in new york , etc . ; and each of these suppliers received my specifications under a different name . "
" but , " i went on , " once these parts were manufactured , did n't they have to be mounted and adjusted ? "
" professor , i set up my workshops on a deserted islet in midocean . there our nautilus was completed by me and my workmen , in other words , by my gallant companions whom i 've molded and educated . then , when the operation was over , we burned every trace of our stay on that islet , which if i could have , i 'd have blown up . "
" from all this , may i assume that such a boat costs a fortune ? "
" one last question , captain nemo . "
" ask , professor . "
" you 're rich , then ? "
" infinitely rich , sir , and without any trouble , i could pay off the ten - billion - franc french national debt ! "
i gaped at the bizarre individual who had just spoken these words . was he playing on my credulity ? time would tell .
chapter 14
the black current
the outlines of the continents allow the seas to be divided into five major parts : the frozen arctic and antarctic oceans , the indian ocean , the atlantic ocean , and the pacific ocean .
the pacific ocean extends north to south between the two polar circles and east to west between america and asia over an expanse of 145 degrees of longitude . it 's the most tranquil of the seas ; its currents are wide and slow - moving , its tides moderate , its rainfall abundant . and this was the ocean that i was first destined to cross under these strangest of auspices .
" if you do n't mind , professor , " captain nemo told me , " we 'll determine our exact position and fix the starting point of our voyage . it 's fifteen minutes before noon . i 'm going to rise to the surface of the water . "
the captain pressed an electric bell three times . the pumps began to expel water from the ballast tanks ; on the pressure gauge , a needle marked the decreasing pressures that indicated the nautilus 's upward progress ; then the needle stopped .
" here we are , " the captain said .
i made my way to the central companionway , which led to the platform . i climbed its metal steps , passed through the open hatches , and arrived topside on the nautilus .
near the middle of the platform , the skiff was half set in the ship 's hull , making a slight bulge . fore and aft stood two cupolas of moderate height , their sides slanting and partly inset with heavy biconvex glass , one reserved for the helmsman steering the nautilus , the other for the brilliance of the powerful electric beacon lighting his way .
there was nothing to be seen . not a reef , not an islet . no more abraham lincoln . a deserted immenseness .
raising his sextant , captain nemo took the altitude of the sun , which would give him his latitude . he waited for a few minutes until the orb touched the rim of the horizon . while he was taking his sights , he did n't move a muscle , and the instrument could n't have been steadier in hands made out of marble .
" noon , " he said . " professor , whenever you 're ready . . . . "
i took one last look at the sea , a little yellowish near the landing places of japan , and i went below again to the main lounge .
there the captain fixed his position and used a chronometer to calculate his longitude , which he double - checked against his previous observations of hour angles . then he told me :
" professor aronnax , we 're in longitude 137 degrees 15 ' west-- "
" west of which meridian ? " i asked quickly , hoping the captain 's reply might give me a clue to his nationality .
" sir , " he answered me , " i have chronometers variously set to the meridians of paris , greenwich , and washington , d.c . but in your honor , i 'll use the one for paris . "
this reply told me nothing . i bowed , and the commander went on :
" we 're in longitude 137 degrees 15 ' west of the meridian of paris , and latitude 30 degrees 7 ' north , in other words , about 300 miles from the shores of japan . at noon on this day of november 8 , we hereby begin our voyage of exploration under the waters . "
" may god be with us ! " i replied .
" and now , professor , " the captain added , " i 'll leave you to your intellectual pursuits . i 've set our course east - northeast at a depth of fifty meters . here are some large - scale charts on which you 'll be able to follow that course . the lounge is at your disposal , and with your permission , i 'll take my leave . "
for an entire hour i was deep in these musings , trying to probe this mystery that fascinated me so . then my eyes focused on a huge world map displayed on the table , and i put my finger on the very spot where our just - determined longitude and latitude intersected .
like the continents , the sea has its rivers . these are exclusive currents that can be identified by their temperature and color , the most remarkable being the one called the gulf stream . science has defined the global paths of five chief currents : one in the north atlantic , a second in the south atlantic , a third in the north pacific , a fourth in the south pacific , and a fifth in the southern indian ocean . also it 's likely that a sixth current used to exist in the northern indian ocean , when the caspian and aral seas joined up with certain large asian lakes to form a single uniform expanse of water .
" where are we ? " the canadian exclaimed . " in the quebec museum ? "
" begging master 's pardon , " conseil answered , " but this seems more like the sommerard artifacts exhibition ! "
" if master says so , then so be it , " conseil answered . " but in all honesty , this lounge is enough to astonish even someone flemish like myself . "
" indulge your astonishment , my friend , and have a look , because there 's plenty of work here for a classifier of your talents . "
meanwhile ned land , less dedicated to conchology , questioned me about my interview with captain nemo . had i discovered who he was , where he came from , where he was heading , how deep he was taking us ? in short , a thousand questions i had no time to answer .
i told him everything i knew -- or , rather , everything i did n't know-- and i asked him what he had seen or heard on his part .
" have n't seen or heard a thing ! " the canadian replied . " i have n't even spotted the crew of this boat . by any chance , could they be electric too ? "
" electric ? "
" i 'm unable to answer you , mr . land . and trust me on this : for the time being , get rid of these notions of taking over the nautilus or escaping from it . this boat is a masterpiece of modern technology , and i 'd be sorry to have missed it ! many people would welcome the circumstances that have been handed us , just to walk in the midst of these wonders . so keep calm , and let 's see what 's happening around us . "
" see ! " the harpooner exclaimed . " there 's nothing to see , nothing we 'll ever see from this sheet - iron prison ! we 're simply running around blindfolded-- "
ned land was just pronouncing these last words when we were suddenly plunged into darkness , utter darkness . the ceiling lights went out so quickly , my eyes literally ached , just as if we had experienced the opposite sensation of going from the deepest gloom to the brightest sunlight .
we stood stock - still , not knowing what surprise was waiting for us , whether pleasant or unpleasant . but a sliding sound became audible . you could tell that some panels were shifting over the nautilus 's sides .
" it 's the beginning of the end ! " ned land said .
" . . . order hydromedusa , " conseil muttered .
suddenly , through two oblong openings , daylight appeared on both sides of the lounge . the liquid masses came into view , brightly lit by the ship 's electric outpourings . we were separated from the sea by two panes of glass . initially i shuddered at the thought that these fragile partitions could break ; but strong copper bands secured them , giving them nearly infinite resistance .
the sea was clearly visible for a one - mile radius around the nautilus . what a sight ! what pen could describe it ? who could portray the effects of this light through these translucent sheets of water , the subtlety of its progressive shadings into the ocean 's upper and lower strata ?
the transparency of salt water has long been recognized . its clarity is believed to exceed that of spring water . the mineral and organic substances it holds in suspension actually increase its translucency . in certain parts of the caribbean sea , you can see the sandy bottom with startling distinctness as deep as 145 meters down , and the penetrating power of the sun 's rays seems to give out only at a depth of 300 meters . but in this fluid setting traveled by the nautilus , our electric glow was being generated in the very heart of the waves . it was no longer illuminated water , it was liquid light .
if we accept the hypotheses of the microbiologist ehrenberg-- who believes that these underwater depths are lit up by phosphorescent organisms -- nature has certainly saved one of her most prodigious sights for residents of the sea , and i could judge for myself from the thousandfold play of the light . on both sides i had windows opening over these unexplored depths . the darkness in the lounge enhanced the brightness outside , and we stared as if this clear glass were the window of an immense aquarium .
the nautilus seemed to be standing still . this was due to the lack of landmarks . but streaks of water , parted by the ship 's spur , sometimes threaded before our eyes with extraordinary speed .
in wonderment , we leaned on our elbows before these show windows , and our stunned silence remained unbroken until conseil said :
" how unusual ! " the canadian put in , setting aside his tantrums and getaway schemes while submitting to this irresistible allure . " a man would go an even greater distance just to stare at such a sight ! "
" ah ! " i exclaimed . " i see our captain 's way of life ! he 's found himself a separate world that saves its most astonishing wonders just for him ! "
" but where are the fish ? " the canadian ventured to observe . " i do n't see any fish ! "
" why would you care , ned my friend ? " conseil replied . " since you have no knowledge of them . "
" me ? a fisherman ! " ned land exclaimed .
and on this subject a dispute arose between the two friends , since both were knowledgeable about fish , but from totally different standpoints .
everyone knows that fish make up the fourth and last class in the vertebrate branch . they have been quite aptly defined as : " cold - blooded vertebrates with a double circulatory system , breathing through gills , and designed to live in water . " they consist of two distinct series : the series of bony fish , in other words , those whose spines have vertebrae made of bone ; and cartilaginous fish , in other words , those whose spines have vertebrae made of cartilage .
possibly the canadian was familiar with this distinction , but conseil knew far more about it ; and since he and ned were now fast friends , he just had to show off . so he told the harpooner :
" ned my friend , you 're a slayer of fish , a highly skilled fisherman . you 've caught a large number of these fascinating animals . but i 'll bet you do n't know how they 're classified . "
" sure i do , " the harpooner replied in all seriousness . " they 're classified into fish we eat and fish we do n't eat ! "
" spoken like a true glutton , " conseil replied . " but tell me , are you familiar with the differences between bony fish and cartilaginous fish ? "
" just maybe , conseil . "
" and how about the subdivisions of these two large classes ? "
" i have n't the foggiest notion , " the canadian replied .
" all right , listen and learn , ned my friend ! bony fish are subdivided into six orders . primo , the acanthopterygians , whose upper jaw is fully formed and free - moving , and whose gills take the shape of a comb . this order consists of fifteen families , in other words , three - quarters of all known fish . example : the common perch . "
" pretty fair eating , " ned land replied .
" ugh ! " the canadian put in with distinct scorn . " you can keep the freshwater fish ! "
" tertio , " conseil said , " the subbrachians , whose pelvic fins are attached under the pectorals and hang directly from the shoulder bone . this order contains four families . examples : flatfish such as sole , turbot , dab , plaice , brill , etc . "
" excellent , really excellent ! " the harpooner exclaimed , interested in fish only from an edible viewpoint .
" quarto , " conseil went on , unabashed , " the apods , with long bodies that lack pelvic fins and are covered by a heavy , often glutinous skin , an order consisting of only one family . examples : common eels and electric eels . "
" so - so , just so - so ! " ned land replied .
" bad , very bad ! " the harpooner replied .
" sexto and last , " conseil said , " the plectognaths , whose maxillary bone is firmly attached to the side of the intermaxillary that forms the jaw , and whose palate arch is locked to the skull by sutures that render the jaw immovable , an order lacking true pelvic fins and which consists of two families . examples : puffers and moonfish . "
" they 're an insult to a frying pan ! " the canadian exclaimed .
" are you grasping all this , ned my friend ? " asked the scholarly conseil .
" as for cartilaginous fish , " conseil went on unflappably , " they consist of only three orders . "
" good news , " ned put in .
" primo , the cyclostomes , whose jaws are fused into a flexible ring and whose gill openings are simply a large number of holes , an order consisting of only one family . example : the lamprey . "
" an acquired taste , " ned land replied .
" secundo , the selacians , with gills resembling those of the cyclostomes but whose lower jaw is free - moving . this order , which is the most important in the class , consists of two families . examples : the ray and the shark . "
" what ! " ned land exclaimed . " rays and man - eaters in the same order ? well , conseil my friend , on behalf of the rays , i would n't advise you to put them in the same fish tank ! "
" tertio , " conseil replied , " the sturionians , whose gill opening is the usual single slit adorned with a gill cover , an order consisting of four genera . example : the sturgeon . "
" ah , conseil my friend , you saved the best for last , in my opinion anyhow ! and that 's all of ' em ? "
" all right , conseil my friend , " the harpooner said , leaning toward the glass panel , " here come a couple of your varieties now ! "
" yes ! fish ! " conseil exclaimed . " one would think he was in front of an aquarium ! "
" no , " i replied , " because an aquarium is nothing more than a cage , and these fish are as free as birds in the air ! "
" well , conseil my friend , identify them ! start naming them ! " ned land exclaimed .
" me ? " conseil replied . " i 'm unable to ! that 's my employer 's bailiwick ! "
" a triggerfish , " i said .
" it 's a chinese triggerfish , " ned land replied .
" genus balistes , family scleroderma , order plectognatha , " conseil muttered .
assuredly , ned and conseil in combination added up to one outstanding naturalist .
our wonderment stayed at an all - time fever pitch . our exclamations were endless . ned identified the fish , conseil classified them , and as for me , i was in ecstasy over the verve of their movements and the beauty of their forms . never before had i been given the chance to glimpse these animals alive and at large in their native element .
given such a complete collection from the seas of japan and china , i wo n't mention every variety that passed before our dazzled eyes . more numerous than birds in the air , these fish raced right up to us , no doubt attracted by the brilliant glow of our electric beacon .
suddenly daylight appeared in the lounge . the sheet - iron panels slid shut . the magical vision disappeared . but for a good while i kept dreaming away , until the moment my eyes focused on the instruments hanging on the wall . the compass still showed our heading as east - northeast , the pressure gauge indicated a pressure of five atmospheres ( corresponding to a depth of fifty meters ) , and the electric log gave our speed as fifteen miles per hour .
i waited for captain nemo . but he did n't appear . the clock marked the hour of five .
i spent the evening in reading , writing , and thinking . then drowsiness overtook me , i stretched out on my eelgrass mattress , and i fell into a deep slumber , while the nautilus glided through the swiftly flowing black current .
chapter 15
an invitation in writing
the next day , november 9 , i woke up only after a long , twelve - hour slumber . conseil , a creature of habit , came to ask " how master 's night went , " and to offer his services . he had left his canadian friend sleeping like a man who had never done anything else .
the entire day passed without my being honored by a visit from captain nemo . the panels in the lounge did n't open . perhaps they did n't want us to get tired of these beautiful things .
the nautilus kept to an east - northeasterly heading , a speed of twelve miles per hour , and a depth between fifty and sixty meters .
next day , november 10 : the same neglect , the same solitude . i did n't see a soul from the crew . ned and conseil spent the better part of the day with me . they were astonished at the captain 's inexplicable absence . was this eccentric man ill ? did he want to change his plans concerning us ?
but after all , as conseil noted , we enjoyed complete freedom , we were daintily and abundantly fed . our host had kept to the terms of his agreement . we could n't complain , and moreover the very uniqueness of our situation had such generous rewards in store for us , we had no grounds for criticism .
that day i started my diary of these adventures , which has enabled me to narrate them with the most scrupulous accuracy ; and one odd detail : i wrote it on paper manufactured from marine eelgrass .
early in the morning on november 11 , fresh air poured through the nautilus 's interior , informing me that we had returned to the surface of the ocean to renew our oxygen supply . i headed for the central companionway and climbed onto the platform .
so i was marveling at this delightful sunrise , so life - giving and cheerful , when i heard someone climbing onto the platform .
" nautron respoc lorni virch . "
what it meant i was unable to say .
five days passed in this way with no change in our situation . every morning i climbed onto the platform . the same phrase was pronounced by the same individual . captain nemo did not appear .
i was pursuing the policy that we had seen the last of him , when on november 16 , while reentering my stateroom with ned and conseil , i found a note addressed to me on the table .
the note was worded as follows :
professor aronnax aboard the nautilus november 16 , 1867
captain nemo , commander of the nautilus .
" a hunting trip ! " ned exclaimed .
" and in his forests on crespo island ! " conseil added .
" but does this mean the old boy goes ashore ? " ned land went on .
" that seems to be the gist of it , " i said , rereading the letter .
" well , we 've got to accept ! " the canadian answered . " once we 're on solid ground , we 'll figure out a course of action . besides , it would n't pain me to eat a couple slices of fresh venison ! "
without trying to reconcile the contradictions between captain nemo 's professed horror of continents or islands and his invitation to go hunting in a forest , i was content to reply :
" first let 's look into this crespo island . "
i consulted the world map ; and in latitude 32 degrees 40 ' north and longitude 167 degrees 50 ' west , i found an islet that had been discovered in 1801 by captain crespo , which old spanish charts called rocca de la plata , in other words , " silver rock . " so we were about 1,800 miles from our starting point , and by a slight change of heading , the nautilus was bringing us back toward the southeast .
i showed my companions this small , stray rock in the middle of the north pacific .
" if captain nemo does sometimes go ashore , " i told them , " at least he only picks desert islands ! "
ned land shook his head without replying ; then he and conseil left me . after supper was served me by the mute and emotionless steward , i fell asleep ; but not without some anxieties .
when i woke up the next day , november 17 , i sensed that the nautilus was completely motionless . i dressed hurriedly and entered the main lounge .
captain nemo was there waiting for me . he stood up , bowed , and asked if it suited me to come along .
since he made no allusion to his absence the past eight days , i also refrained from mentioning it , and i simply answered that my companions and i were ready to go with him .
" only , sir , " i added , " i 'll take the liberty of addressing a question to you . "
" address away , professor aronnax , and if i 'm able to answer , i will . "
" well then , captain , how is it that you 've severed all ties with the shore , yet you own forests on crespo island ? "
" underwater forests ! " i exclaimed .
" yes , professor . "
" and you 're offering to take me to them ? "
" precisely . "
" on foot ? "
" without getting your feet wet . "
" while hunting ? "
" while hunting . "
" rifles in hand ? "
" rifles in hand . "
i stared at the nautilus 's commander with an air anything but flattering to the man .
" assuredly , " i said to myself , " he 's contracted some mental illness . he 's had a fit that 's lasted eight days and is n't over even yet . what a shame ! i liked him better eccentric than insane ! "
these thoughts were clearly readable on my face ; but captain nemo remained content with inviting me to follow him , and i did so like a man resigned to the worst .
we arrived at the dining room , where we found breakfast served .
i did justice to this meal . it was made up of various fish and some slices of sea cucumber , that praiseworthy zoophyte , all garnished with such highly appetizing seaweed as the porphyra laciniata and the laurencia primafetida . our beverage consisted of clear water to which , following the captain 's example , i added some drops of a fermented liquor extracted by the kamchatka process from the seaweed known by name as rhodymenia palmata .
at first captain nemo ate without pronouncing a single word . then he told me :
" professor , when i proposed that you go hunting in my crespo forests , you thought i was contradicting myself . when i informed you that it was an issue of underwater forests , you thought i 'd gone insane . professor , you must never make snap judgments about your fellow man . "
" but , captain , believe me-- "
" kindly listen to me , and you 'll see if you have grounds for accusing me of insanity or self - contradiction . "
" i 'm all attention . "
" professor , you know as well as i do that a man can live underwater so long as he carries with him his own supply of breathable air . for underwater work projects , the workman wears a waterproof suit with his head imprisoned in a metal capsule , while he receives air from above by means of force pumps and flow regulators . "
" that 's the standard equipment for a diving suit , " i said .
" correct , but under such conditions the man has no freedom . he 's attached to a pump that sends him air through an india - rubber hose ; it 's an actual chain that fetters him to the shore , and if we were to be bound in this way to the nautilus , we could n't go far either . "
" then how do you break free ? " i asked .
" that 's perfect , captain nemo , but the air you carry must be quickly depleted ; and once it contains no more than 15 % oxygen , it becomes unfit for breathing . "
" surely , but as i told you , professor aronnax , the nautilus 's pumps enable me to store air under considerable pressure , and given this circumstance , the tank on my diving equipment can supply breathable air for nine or ten hours . "
" i 've no more objections to raise , " i replied . " i 'll only ask you , captain : how can you light your way at the bottom of the ocean ? "
" with the ruhmkorff device , professor aronnax . if the first is carried on the back , the second is fastened to the belt . it consists of a bunsen battery that i activate not with potassium dichromate but with sodium . an induction coil gathers the electricity generated and directs it to a specially designed lantern . in this lantern one finds a glass spiral that contains only a residue of carbon dioxide gas . when the device is operating , this gas becomes luminous and gives off a continuous whitish light . thus provided for , i breathe and i see . "
" captain nemo , to my every objection you give such crushing answers , i 'm afraid to entertain a single doubt . however , though i have no choice but to accept both the rouquayrol and ruhmkorff devices , i 'd like to register some reservations about the rifle with which you 'll equip me . "
" but it is n't a rifle that uses gunpowder , " the captain replied .
" then it 's an air gun ? "
" surely . how can i make gunpowder on my ship when i have no saltpeter , sulfur , or charcoal ? "
" even so , " i replied , " to fire underwater in a medium that 's 855 times denser than air , you 'd have to overcome considerable resistance . "
" but this air must be swiftly depleted . "
" well , in a pinch ca n't my rouquayrol tank supply me with more ? all i have to do is draw it from an ad hoc spigot . besides , professor aronnax , you 'll see for yourself that during these underwater hunting trips , we make no great expenditure of either air or bullets . "
" but it seems to me that in this semidarkness , amid this liquid that 's so dense in comparison to the atmosphere , a gunshot could n't carry far and would prove fatal only with difficulty ! "
" why ? "
captain nemo led me to the nautilus 's stern , and passing by ned and conseil 's cabin , i summoned my two companions , who instantly followed us .
then we arrived at a cell located within easy access of the engine room ; in this cell we were to get dressed for our stroll .
chapter 16 strolling the plains
this cell , properly speaking , was the nautilus 's arsenal and wardrobe . hanging from its walls , a dozen diving outfits were waiting for anybody who wanted to take a stroll .
after seeing these , ned land exhibited an obvious distaste for the idea of putting one on .
" but my gallant ned , " i told him , " the forests of crespo island are simply underwater forests ! "
" oh great ! " put in the disappointed harpooner , watching his dreams of fresh meat fade away . " and you , professor aronnax , are you going to stick yourself inside these clothes ? "
" it has to be , mr . ned . "
" have it your way , sir , " the harpooner replied , shrugging his shoulders . " but speaking for myself , i 'll never get into those things unless they force me ! "
" no one will force you , mr . land , " captain nemo said .
" and is conseil going to risk it ? " ned asked .
" where master goes , i go , " conseil replied .
these perfected diving suits , it was easy to see , were a far cry from such misshapen costumes as the cork breastplates , leather jumpers , seagoing tunics , barrel helmets , etc . , invented and acclaimed in the 18th century .
conseil and i were soon dressed in these diving suits , as were captain nemo and one of his companions -- a herculean type who must have been prodigiously strong . all that remained was to encase one 's head in its metal sphere . but before proceeding with this operation , i asked the captain for permission to examine the rifles set aside for us .
one of the nautilus 's men presented me with a streamlined rifle whose butt was boilerplate steel , hollow inside , and of fairly large dimensions . this served as a tank for the compressed air , which a trigger - operated valve could release into the metal chamber . in a groove where the butt was heaviest , a cartridge clip held some twenty electric bullets that , by means of a spring , automatically took their places in the barrel of the rifle . as soon as one shot had been fired , another was ready to go off .
" captain nemo , " i said , " this is an ideal , easy - to - use weapon . i ask only to put it to the test . but how will we reach the bottom of the sea ? "
" right now , professor , the nautilus is aground in ten meters of water , and we 've only to depart . "
" but how will we set out ? "
" you 'll see . "
captain nemo inserted his cranium into its spherical headgear . conseil and i did the same , but not without hearing the canadian toss us a sarcastic " happy hunting . " on top , the suit ended in a collar of threaded copper onto which the metal helmet was screwed . three holes , protected by heavy glass , allowed us to see in any direction with simply a turn of the head inside the sphere . placed on our backs , the rouquayrol device went into operation as soon as it was in position , and for my part , i could breathe with ease .
the ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt , my rifle in hand , i was ready to go forth . but in all honesty , while imprisoned in these heavy clothes and nailed to the deck by my lead soles , it was impossible for me to take a single step .
but this circumstance had been foreseen , because i felt myself propelled into a little room adjoining the wardrobe . towed in the same way , my companions went with me . i heard a door with watertight seals close after us , and we were surrounded by profound darkness .
and now , how can i convey the impressions left on me by this stroll under the waters . words are powerless to describe such wonders ! when even the painter 's brush ca n't depict the effects unique to the liquid element , how can the writer 's pen hope to reproduce them ?
captain nemo walked in front , and his companion followed us a few steps to the rear . conseil and i stayed next to each other , as if daydreaming that through our metal carapaces , a little polite conversation might still be possible ! already i no longer felt the bulkiness of my clothes , footwear , and air tank , nor the weight of the heavy sphere inside which my head was rattling like an almond in its shell . once immersed in water , all these objects lost a part of their weight equal to the weight of the liquid they displaced , and thanks to this law of physics discovered by archimedes , i did just fine . i was no longer an inert mass , and i had , comparatively speaking , great freedom of movement .
soon , scarcely blurred by their distance from us , the forms of some objects took shape before my eyes . i recognized the lower slopes of some magnificent rocks carpeted by the finest zoophyte specimens , and right off , i was struck by an effect unique to this medium .
we had been gone from the nautilus for about an hour and a half . it was almost noon . i spotted this fact in the perpendicularity of the sun 's rays , which were no longer refracted . the magic of these solar colors disappeared little by little , with emerald and sapphire shades vanishing from our surroundings altogether . we walked with steady steps that rang on the seafloor with astonishing intensity . the tiniest sounds were transmitted with a speed to which the ear is unaccustomed on shore . in fact , water is a better conductor of sound than air , and under the waves noises carry four times as fast .
just then the seafloor began to slope sharply downward . the light took on a uniform hue . we reached a depth of 100 meters , by which point we were undergoing a pressure of ten atmospheres . but my diving clothes were built along such lines that i never suffered from this pressure . i felt only a certain tightness in the joints of my fingers , and even this discomfort soon disappeared . as for the exhaustion bound to accompany a two - hour stroll in such unfamiliar trappings -- it was nil . helped by the water , my movements were executed with startling ease .
arriving at this 300-foot depth , i still detected the sun 's rays , but just barely . their intense brilliance had been followed by a reddish twilight , a midpoint between day and night . but we could see well enough to find our way , and it still was n't necessary to activate the ruhmkorff device .
just then captain nemo stopped . he waited until i joined him , then he pointed a finger at some dark masses outlined in the shadows a short distance away .
" it 's the forest of crespo island , " i thought ; and i was not mistaken .
chapter 17
an underwater forest
we had finally arrived on the outskirts of this forest , surely one of the finest in captain nemo 's immense domains . he regarded it as his own and had laid the same claim to it that , in the first days of the world , the first men had to their forests on land . besides , who else could dispute his ownership of this underwater property ? what other , bolder pioneer would come , ax in hand , to clear away its dark underbrush ?
this forest was made up of big treelike plants , and when we entered beneath their huge arches , my eyes were instantly struck by the unique arrangement of their branches -- an arrangement that i had never before encountered .
near one o'clock , captain nemo gave the signal to halt . speaking for myself , i was glad to oblige , and we stretched out beneath an arbor of winged kelp , whose long thin tendrils stood up like arrows .
this short break was a delight . it lacked only the charm of conversation . but it was impossible to speak , impossible to reply . i simply nudged my big copper headpiece against conseil 's headpiece . i saw a happy gleam in the gallant lad 's eyes , and to communicate his pleasure , he jiggled around inside his carapace in the world 's silliest way .
how long i was sunk in this torpor i can not estimate ; but when i awoke , it seemed as if the sun were settling toward the horizon . captain nemo was already up , and i had started to stretch my limbs , when an unexpected apparition brought me sharply to my feet .
a few paces away , a monstrous , meter - high sea spider was staring at me with beady eyes , poised to spring at me . although my diving suit was heavy enough to protect me from this animal 's bites , i could n't keep back a shudder of horror . just then conseil woke up , together with the nautilus 's sailor . captain nemo alerted his companion to this hideous crustacean , which a swing of the rifle butt quickly brought down , and i watched the monster 's horrible legs writhing in dreadful convulsions .
i say 150 meters , although i had no instruments for estimating this distance . but i knew that the sun 's rays , even in the clearest seas , could reach no deeper . so at precisely this point the darkness became profound . not a single object was visible past ten paces . consequently , i had begun to grope my way when suddenly i saw the glow of an intense white light . captain nemo had just activated his electric device . his companion did likewise . conseil and i followed suit . by turning a switch , i established contact between the induction coil and the glass spiral , and the sea , lit up by our four lanterns , was illuminated for a radius of twenty - five meters .
captain nemo continued to plummet into the dark depths of this forest , whose shrubbery grew ever more sparse . i observed that vegetable life was disappearing more quickly than animal life . the open - sea plants had already left behind the increasingly arid seafloor , where a prodigious number of animals were still swarming : zoophytes , articulates , mollusks , and fish .
while we were walking , i thought the lights of our ruhmkorff devices would automatically attract some inhabitants of these dark strata . but if they did approach us , at least they kept at a distance regrettable from the hunter 's standpoint . several times i saw captain nemo stop and take aim with his rifle ; then , after sighting down its barrel for a few seconds , he would straighten up and resume his walk .
the captain stopped suddenly . a gesture from him brought us to a halt , and however much i wanted to clear this wall , i had to stop . here ended the domains of captain nemo . he had no desire to pass beyond them . farther on lay a part of the globe he would no longer tread underfoot .
our return journey began . captain nemo resumed the lead in our little band , always heading forward without hesitation . i noted that we did n't follow the same path in returning to the nautilus . this new route , very steep and hence very arduous , quickly took us close to the surface of the sea . but this return to the upper strata was n't so sudden that decompression took place too quickly , which could have led to serious organic disorders and given us those internal injuries so fatal to divers . with great promptness , the light reappeared and grew stronger ; and the refraction of the sun , already low on the horizon , again ringed the edges of various objects with the entire color spectrum .
at a depth of ten meters , we walked amid a swarm of small fish from every species , more numerous than birds in the air , more agile too ; but no aquatic game worthy of a gunshot had yet been offered to our eyes .
captain nemo 's companion picked up the animal , loaded it on his shoulder , and we took to the trail again .
another unusual effect . heavy clouds passed above us , forming and fading swiftly . but after thinking it over , i realized that these so - called clouds were caused simply by the changing densities of the long ground swells , and i even spotted the foaming " white caps " that their breaking crests were proliferating over the surface of the water . lastly , i could n't help seeing the actual shadows of large birds passing over our heads , swiftly skimming the surface of the sea .
on this occasion i witnessed one of the finest gunshots ever to thrill the marrow of a hunter . a large bird with a wide wingspan , quite clearly visible , approached and hovered over us . when it was just a few meters above the waves , captain nemo 's companion took aim and fired . the animal dropped , electrocuted , and its descent brought it within reach of our adroit hunter , who promptly took possession of it . it was an albatross of the finest species , a wonderful specimen of these open - sea fowl .
this incident did not interrupt our walk . for two hours we were sometimes led over plains of sand , sometimes over prairies of seaweed that were quite arduous to cross . in all honesty , i was dead tired by the time i spotted a hazy glow half a mile away , cutting through the darkness of the waters . it was the nautilus 's beacon . within twenty minutes we would be on board , and there i could breathe easy again -- because my tank 's current air supply seemed to be quite low in oxygen . but i was reckoning without an encounter that slightly delayed our arrival .
i was lagging behind some twenty paces when i saw captain nemo suddenly come back toward me . with his powerful hands he sent me buckling to the ground , while his companion did the same to conseil . at first i did n't know what to make of this sudden assault , but i was reassured to observe the captain lying motionless beside me .
i was stretched out on the seafloor directly beneath some bushes of algae , when i raised my head and spied two enormous masses hurtling by , throwing off phosphorescent glimmers .
my blood turned cold in my veins ! i saw that we were under threat from a fearsome pair of sharks . they were blue sharks , dreadful man - eaters with enormous tails , dull , glassy stares , and phosphorescent matter oozing from holes around their snouts . they were like monstrous fireflies that could thoroughly pulverize a man in their iron jaws ! i do n't know if conseil was busy with their classification , but as for me , i looked at their silver bellies , their fearsome mouths bristling with teeth , from a viewpoint less than scientific-- more as a victim than as a professor of natural history .
luckily these voracious animals have poor eyesight . they went by without noticing us , grazing us with their brownish fins ; and miraculously , we escaped a danger greater than encountering a tiger deep in the jungle .
half an hour later , guided by its electric trail , we reached the nautilus . the outside door had been left open , and captain nemo closed it after we reentered the first cell . then he pressed a button . i heard pumps operating within the ship , i felt the water lowering around me , and in a few moments the cell was completely empty . the inside door opened , and we passed into the wardrobe .
there our diving suits were removed , not without difficulty ; and utterly exhausted , faint from lack of food and rest , i repaired to my stateroom , full of wonder at this startling excursion on the bottom of the sea .
chapter 18 four thousand leagues under the pacific
by the next morning , november 18 , i was fully recovered from my exhaustion of the day before , and i climbed onto the platform just as the nautilus 's chief officer was pronouncing his daily phrase . it then occurred to me that these words either referred to the state of the sea , or that they meant : " there 's nothing in sight . "
and in truth , the ocean was deserted . not a sail on the horizon . the tips of crespo island had disappeared during the night . the sea , absorbing every color of the prism except its blue rays , reflected the latter in every direction and sported a wonderful indigo tint . the undulating waves regularly took on the appearance of watered silk with wide stripes .
i was marveling at this magnificent ocean view when captain nemo appeared . he did n't seem to notice my presence and began a series of astronomical observations . then , his operations finished , he went and leaned his elbows on the beacon housing , his eyes straying over the surface of the ocean .
the nets were hauled on board . they were a breed of trawl resembling those used off the normandy coast , huge pouches held half open by a floating pole and a chain laced through the lower meshes . trailing in this way from these iron glove makers , the resulting receptacles scoured the ocean floor and collected every marine exhibit in their path . that day they gathered up some unusual specimens from these fish - filled waterways : anglerfish whose comical movements qualify them for the epithet " clowns , " black commerson anglers equipped with their antennas , undulating triggerfish encircled by little red bands , bloated puffers whose venom is extremely insidious , some olive - hued lampreys , snipefish covered with silver scales , cutlass fish whose electrocuting power equals that of the electric eel and the electric ray , scaly featherbacks with brown crosswise bands , greenish codfish , several varieties of goby , etc . ; finally , some fish of larger proportions : a one - meter jack with a prominent head , several fine bonito from the genus scomber decked out in the colors blue and silver , and three magnificent tuna whose high speeds could n't save them from our trawl .
i estimate that this cast of the net brought in more than 1,000 pounds of fish . it was a fine catch but not surprising . in essence , these nets stayed in our wake for several hours , incarcerating an entire aquatic world in prisons made of thread . so we were never lacking in provisions of the highest quality , which the nautilus 's speed and the allure of its electric light could continually replenish .
these various exhibits from the sea were immediately lowered down the hatch in the direction of the storage lockers , some to be eaten fresh , others to be preserved .
after its fishing was finished and its air supply renewed , i thought the nautilus would resume its underwater excursion , and i was getting ready to return to my stateroom , when captain nemo turned to me and said without further preamble :
" look at this ocean , professor ! does n't it have the actual gift of life ? does n't it experience both anger and affection ? last evening it went to sleep just as we did , and there it is , waking up after a peaceful night ! "
no hellos or good mornings for this gent ! you would have thought this eccentric individual was simply continuing a conversation we 'd already started !
as the captain was finishing his sentence , i said to myself : " the pole ! is this brazen individual claiming he 'll take us even to that location ? "
meanwhile the captain fell silent and stared at the element he had studied so thoroughly and unceasingly . then , going on :
" salts , " he said , " fill the sea in considerable quantities , professor , and if you removed all its dissolved saline content , you 'd create a mass measuring 4,500,000 cubic leagues , which if it were spread all over the globe , would form a layer more than ten meters high . and do n't think that the presence of these salts is due merely to some whim of nature . no . they make ocean water less open to evaporation and prevent winds from carrying off excessive amounts of steam , which , when condensing , would submerge the temperate zones . salts play a leading role , the role of stabilizer for the general ecology of the globe ! "
captain nemo stopped , straightened up , took a few steps along the platform , and returned to me :
when captain nemo spoke in this way , he was transfigured , and he filled me with extraordinary excitement .
" there , " he added , " out there lies true existence ! and i can imagine the founding of nautical towns , clusters of underwater households that , like the nautilus , would return to the surface of the sea to breathe each morning , free towns if ever there were , independent cities ! then again , who knows whether some tyrant . . . "
captain nemo finished his sentence with a vehement gesture . then , addressing me directly , as if to drive away an ugly thought :
" professor aronnax , " he asked me , " do you know the depth of the ocean floor ? "
" at least , captain , i know what the major soundings tell us . "
" could you quote them to me , so i can double - check them as the need arises ? "
" well , professor , " captain nemo replied , " we 'll show you better than that , i hope . as for the average depth of this part of the pacific , i 'll inform you that it 's a mere 4,000 meters . "
this said , captain nemo headed to the hatch and disappeared down the ladder . i followed him and went back to the main lounge . the propeller was instantly set in motion , and the log gave our speed as twenty miles per hour .
conseil and land spent the long hours with me . conseil had told his friend about the wonders of our undersea stroll , and the canadian was sorry he had n't gone along . but i hoped an opportunity would arise for a visit to the forests of oceania .
almost every day the panels in the lounge were open for some hours , and our eyes never tired of probing the mysteries of the underwater world .
the nautilus 's general heading was southeast , and it stayed at a depth between 100 and 150 meters . however , from lord - knows - what whim , one day it did a diagonal dive by means of its slanting fins , reaching strata located 2,000 meters underwater . the thermometer indicated a temperature of 4.25 degrees centigrade , which at this depth seemed to be a temperature common to all latitudes .
the nautilus kept to its southeasterly heading . on december 1 it cut the equator at longitude 142 degrees , and on the 4th of the same month , after a quick crossing marked by no incident , we raised the marquesas islands . three miles off , in latitude 8 degrees 57 ' south and longitude 139 degrees 32 ' west , i spotted martin point on nuku hiva , chief member of this island group that belongs to france . i could make out only its wooded mountains on the horizon , because captain nemo hated to hug shore . there our nets brought up some fine fish samples : dolphinfish with azure fins , gold tails , and flesh that 's unrivaled in the entire world , wrasse from the genus hologymnosus that were nearly denuded of scales but exquisite in flavor , knifejaws with bony beaks , yellowish albacore that were as tasty as bonito , all fish worth classifying in the ship 's pantry .
it was during the night of december 9 - 10 that the nautilus encountered this army of distinctly nocturnal mollusks . they numbered in the millions . they were migrating from the temperate zones toward zones still warmer , following the itineraries of herring and sardines . we stared at them through our thick glass windows : they swam backward with tremendous speed , moving by means of their locomotive tubes , chasing fish and mollusks , eating the little ones , eaten by the big ones , and tossing in indescribable confusion the ten feet that nature has rooted in their heads like a hairpiece of pneumatic snakes . despite its speed , the nautilus navigated for several hours in the midst of this school of animals , and its nets brought up an incalculable number , among which i recognized all nine species that professor orbigny has classified as native to the pacific ocean .
during this crossing , the sea continually lavished us with the most marvelous sights . its variety was infinite . it changed its setting and decor for the mere pleasure of our eyes , and we were called upon not simply to contemplate the works of our creator in the midst of the liquid element , but also to probe the ocean 's most daunting mysteries .
during the day of december 11 , i was busy reading in the main lounge . ned land and conseil were observing the luminous waters through the gaping panels . the nautilus was motionless . its ballast tanks full , it was sitting at a depth of 1,000 meters in a comparatively unpopulated region of the ocean where only larger fish put in occasional appearances .
just then i was studying a delightful book by jean mac , the servants of the stomach , and savoring its ingenious teachings , when conseil interrupted my reading .
" what is it , conseil ? "
" it 's something that master should see . "
in the broad electric daylight , an enormous black mass , quite motionless , hung suspended in the midst of the waters . i observed it carefully , trying to find out the nature of this gigantic cetacean . then a sudden thought crossed my mind .
" a ship ! " i exclaimed .
" yes , " the canadian replied , " a disabled craft that 's sinking straight down ! "
what a scene ! we stood dumbstruck , hearts pounding , before this shipwreck caught in the act , as if it had been photographed in its final moments , so to speak ! and already i could see enormous sharks moving in , eyes ablaze , drawn by the lure of human flesh !
meanwhile , turning , the nautilus made a circle around the sinking ship , and for an instant i could read the board on its stern : the florida
sunderland , england
chapter 19
vanikoro
this dreadful sight was the first of a whole series of maritime catastrophes that the nautilus would encounter on its run . when it plied more heavily traveled seas , we often saw wrecked hulls rotting in midwater , and farther down , cannons , shells , anchors , chains , and a thousand other iron objects rusting away .
the day i expounded this theory to captain nemo , he answered me coldly :
sailors ' luck led the nautilus straight to reao island , one of the most unusual in this group , which was discovered in 1822 by captain bell aboard the minerva . so i was able to study the madreporic process that has created the islands in this ocean .
madrepores , which one must guard against confusing with precious coral , clothe their tissue in a limestone crust , and their variations in structure have led my famous mentor professor milne - edwards to classify them into five divisions . the tiny microscopic animals that secrete this polypary live by the billions in the depths of their cells . their limestone deposits build up into rocks , reefs , islets , islands . in some places , they form atolls , a circular ring surrounding a lagoon or small inner lake that gaps place in contact with the sea . elsewhere , they take the shape of barrier reefs , such as those that exist along the coasts of new caledonia and several of the tuamotu islands . in still other localities , such as runion island and the island of mauritius , they build fringing reefs , high , straight walls next to which the ocean 's depth is considerable .
while cruising along only a few cable lengths from the underpinning of reao island , i marveled at the gigantic piece of work accomplished by these microscopic laborers . these walls were the express achievements of madrepores known by the names fire coral , finger coral , star coral , and stony coral . these polyps grow exclusively in the agitated strata at the surface of the sea , and so it 's in the upper reaches that they begin these substructures , which sink little by little together with the secreted rubble binding them . this , at least , is the theory of mr . charles darwin , who thus explains the formation of atolls -- a theory superior , in my view , to the one that says these madreporic edifices sit on the summits of mountains or volcanoes submerged a few feet below sea level .
i could observe these strange walls quite closely : our sounding lines indicated that they dropped perpendicularly for more than 300 meters , and our electric beams made the bright limestone positively sparkle .
in reply to a question conseil asked me about the growth rate of these colossal barriers , i thoroughly amazed him by saying that scientists put it at an eighth of an inch per biennium .
" therefore , " he said to me , " to build these walls , it took . . . ? "
" 192,000 years , my gallant conseil , which significantly extends the biblical days of creation . what 's more , the formation of coal-- in other words , the petrification of forests swallowed by floods-- and the cooling of basaltic rocks likewise call for a much longer period of time . i might add that those ' days ' in the bible must represent whole epochs and not literally the lapse of time between two sunrises , because according to the bible itself , the sun does n't date from the first day of creation . "
when the nautilus returned to the surface of the ocean , i could take in reao island over its whole flat , wooded expanse . obviously its madreporic rocks had been made fertile by tornadoes and thunderstorms . one day , carried off by a hurricane from neighboring shores , some seed fell onto these limestone beds , mixing with decomposed particles of fish and marine plants to form vegetable humus . propelled by the waves , a coconut arrived on this new coast . its germ took root . its tree grew tall , catching steam off the water . a brook was born . little by little , vegetation spread . tiny animals -- worms , insects -- rode ashore on tree trunks snatched from islands to windward . turtles came to lay their eggs . birds nested in the young trees . in this way animal life developed , and drawn by the greenery and fertile soil , man appeared . and that 's how these islands were formed , the immense achievement of microscopic animals .
by december 15 we had left the alluring society islands in the west , likewise elegant tahiti , queen of the pacific . in the morning i spotted this island 's lofty summits a few miles to leeward . its waters supplied excellent fish for the tables on board : mackerel , bonito , albacore , and a few varieties of that sea serpent named the moray eel .
extending over an expanse of 100 leagues north to south , and over 90 leagues east to west , this island group lies between latitude 2 degrees and 6 degrees south , and between longitude 174 degrees and 179 degrees west . it consists of a number of islands , islets , and reefs , among which we noted the islands of viti levu , vanua levu , and kadavu .
and if mr . ned land did not repent of his gluttony at our oyster fest , it 's because oysters are the only dish that never causes indigestion . in fact , it takes no less than sixteen dozen of these headless mollusks to supply the 315 grams that satisfy one man 's minimum daily requirement for nitrogen .
that day it was yuletide , and it struck me that ned land badly missed celebrating " christmas , " that genuine family holiday where protestants are such zealots .
i had n't seen captain nemo for over a week , when , on the morning of the 27th , he entered the main lounge , as usual acting as if he 'd been gone for just five minutes . i was busy tracing the nautilus 's course on the world map . the captain approached , placed a finger over a position on the chart , and pronounced just one word :
" vanikoro . "
this name was magic ! it was the name of those islets where vessels under the count de la prouse had miscarried . i straightened suddenly .
" the nautilus is bringing us to vanikoro ? " i asked .
" yes , professor , " the captain replied .
" and i 'll be able to visit those famous islands where the compass and the astrolabe came to grief ? "
" if you like , professor . "
" when will we reach vanikoro ? "
" we already have , professor . "
followed by captain nemo , i climbed onto the platform , and from there my eyes eagerly scanned the horizon .
in the northeast there emerged two volcanic islands of unequal size , surrounded by a coral reef whose circuit measured forty miles . we were facing the island of vanikoro proper , to which captain dumont d'urville had given the name " island of the search " ; we lay right in front of the little harbor of vana , located in latitude 16 degrees 4 ' south and longitude 164 degrees 32 ' east . its shores seemed covered with greenery from its beaches to its summits inland , crowned by mt . kapogo , which is 476 fathoms high .
after clearing the outer belt of rocks via a narrow passageway , the nautilus lay inside the breakers where the sea had a depth of thirty to forty fathoms . under the green shade of some tropical evergreens , i spotted a few savages who looked extremely startled at our approach . in this long , blackish object advancing flush with the water , did n't they see some fearsome cetacean that they were obliged to view with distrust ?
just then captain nemo asked me what i knew about the shipwreck of the count de la prouse .
" what everybody knows , captain , " i answered him .
" and could you kindly tell me what everybody knows ? " he asked me in a gently ironic tone .
" very easily . "
i related to him what the final deeds of captain dumont d'urville had brought to light , deeds described here in this heavily condensed summary of the whole matter .
they looked in vain . the hope and the search passed right by vanikoro without stopping there ; and overall , this voyage was plagued by misfortune , ultimately costing the lives of rear admiral d'entrecasteaux , two of his subordinate officers , and several seamen from his crew .
this new search , after putting in at several stops over the pacific , dropped anchor before vanikoro on july 7 , 1827 , in the same harbor of vana where the nautilus was currently floating .
finishing his investigations , dillon stayed at the site of the casualty until the month of october . then he left vanikoro , headed toward new zealand , dropped anchor at calcutta on april 7 , 1828 , and returned to france , where he received a very cordial welcome from king charles x.
but just then the renowned french explorer captain dumont d'urville , unaware of dillon 's activities , had already set sail to search elsewhere for the site of the shipwreck . in essence , a whaling vessel had reported that some medals and a cross of st . louis had been found in the hands of savages in the louisiade islands and new caledonia .
pretty perplexed , dumont d'urville did n't know if he should give credence to these reports , which had been carried in some of the less reliable newspapers ; nevertheless , he decided to start on dillon 's trail .
on the 23rd , several officers circled the island and brought back some rubble of little importance . the natives , adopting a system of denial and evasion , refused to guide them to the site of the casualty . this rather shady conduct aroused the suspicion that the natives had mistreated the castaways ; and in truth , the natives seemed afraid that dumont d'urville had come to avenge the count de la prouse and his unfortunate companions .
but on the 26th , appeased with gifts and seeing that they did n't need to fear any reprisals , the natives led the chief officer , mr . jacquinot , to the site of the shipwreck .
at this location , in three or four fathoms of water between the paeu and vana reefs , there lay some anchors , cannons , and ingots of iron and lead , all caked with limestone concretions . a launch and whaleboat from the new astrolabe were steered to this locality , and after going to exhausting lengths , their crews managed to dredge up an anchor weighing 1,800 pounds , a cast - iron eight - pounder cannon , a lead ingot , and two copper swivel guns .
questioning the natives , captain dumont d'urville also learned that after la prouse 's two ships had miscarried on the island 's reefs , the count had built a smaller craft , only to go off and miscarry a second time . where ? nobody knew .
the commander of the new astrolabe then had a monument erected under a tuft of mangrove , in memory of the famous navigator and his companions . it was a simple quadrangular pyramid , set on a coral base , with no ironwork to tempt the natives ' avarice .
then dumont d'urville tried to depart ; but his crews were run down from the fevers raging on these unsanitary shores , and quite ill himself , he was unable to weigh anchor until march 17 .
meanwhile , fearing that dumont d'urville was n't abreast of dillon 's activities , the french government sent a sloop of war to vanikoro , the bayonnaise under commander legoarant de tromelin , who had been stationed on the american west coast . dropping anchor before vanikoro a few months after the new astrolabe 's departure , the bayonnaise did n't find any additional evidence but verified that the savages had n't disturbed the memorial honoring the count de la prouse .
this is the substance of the account i gave captain nemo .
" so , " he said to me , " the castaways built a third ship on vanikoro island , and to this day , nobody knows where it went and perished ? "
" nobody knows . "
i rushed to the window and saw crusts of coral : fungus coral , siphonula coral , alcyon coral , sea anemone from the genus caryophylia , plus myriads of charming fish including greenfish , damselfish , sweepers , snappers , and squirrelfish ; underneath this coral covering i detected some rubble the old dredges had n't been able to tear free-- iron stirrups , anchors , cannons , shells , tackle from a capstan , a stempost , all objects hailing from the wrecked ships and now carpeted in moving flowers .
and as i stared at this desolate wreckage , captain nemo told me in a solemn voice :
" and how do you know all this ? " i exclaimed .
" here 's what i found at the very site of that final shipwreck ! "
captain nemo showed me a tin box , stamped with the coat of arms of france and all corroded by salt water . he opened it and i saw a bundle of papers , yellowed but still legible .
chapter 20
the torres strait
during the night of december 27 - 28 , the nautilus left the waterways of vanikoro behind with extraordinary speed . its heading was southwesterly , and in three days it had cleared the 750 leagues that separated la prouse 's islands from the southeastern tip of papua .
" good heavens , conseil , it 's just like old times in my office at the botanical gardens in paris ! i accept your kind wishes and i thank you for them . only , i 'd like to know what you mean by a ' happy year ' under the circumstances in which we 're placed . is it a year that will bring our imprisonment to an end , or a year that will see this strange voyage continue ? "
" never , conseil . "
" besides , mr . nemo really lives up to his latin name , since he could n't be less in the way if he did n't exist . "
" true enough , conseil . "
" therefore , with all due respect to master , i think a ' happy year ' would be a year that lets us see everything-- "
" everything , conseil ? no year could be that long . but what does ned land think about all this ? "
" ned land 's thoughts are exactly the opposite of mine , " conseil replied . " he has a practical mind and a demanding stomach . he 's tired of staring at fish and eating them day in and day out . this shortage of wine , bread , and meat is n't suitable for an upstanding anglo - saxon , a man accustomed to beefsteak and unfazed by regular doses of brandy or gin ! "
" for my part , conseil , that does n't bother me in the least , and i 've adjusted very nicely to the diet on board . "
" so have i , " conseil replied . " accordingly , i think as much about staying as mr . land about making his escape . thus , if this new year is n't a happy one for me , it will be for him , and vice versa . no matter what happens , one of us will be pleased . so , in conclusion , i wish master to have whatever his heart desires . "
" thank you , conseil . only i must ask you to postpone the question of new year 's gifts , and temporarily accept a hearty handshake in their place . that 's all i have on me . "
" master has never been more generous , " conseil replied . and with that , the gallant lad went away .
by january 2 we had fared 11,340 miles , hence 5,250 leagues , from our starting point in the seas of japan . before the nautilus 's spur there stretched the dangerous waterways of the coral sea , off the northeast coast of australia . our boat cruised along a few miles away from that daunting shoal where captain cook 's ships wellnigh miscarried on june 10 , 1770 . the craft that cook was aboard charged into some coral rock , and if his vessel did n't go down , it was thanks to the circumstance that a piece of coral broke off in the collision and plugged the very hole it had made in the hull .
on january 4 , two days after crossing the coral sea , we raised the coast of papua . on this occasion captain nemo told me that he intended to reach the indian ocean via the torres strait . this was the extent of his remarks . ned saw with pleasure that this course would bring us , once again , closer to european seas .
papua is 400 leagues long by 130 leagues wide , with a surface area of 40,000 geographic leagues . it 's located between latitude 0 degrees 19 ' and 10 degrees 2 ' south , and between longitude 128 degrees 23 ' and 146 degrees 15 ' . at noon , while the chief officer was taking the sun 's altitude , i spotted the summits of the arfak mountains , rising in terraces and ending in sharp peaks .
so the nautilus hove before the entrance to the world 's most dangerous strait , a passageway that even the boldest navigators hesitated to clear : the strait that luis vaez de torres faced on returning from the south seas in melanesia , the strait in which sloops of war under captain dumont d'urville ran aground in 1840 and nearly miscarried with all hands . and even the nautilus , rising superior to every danger in the sea , was about to become intimate with its coral reefs .
the torres strait is about thirty - four leagues wide , but it 's obstructed by an incalculable number of islands , islets , breakers , and rocks that make it nearly impossible to navigate . consequently , captain nemo took every desired precaution in crossing it . floating flush with the water , the nautilus moved ahead at a moderate pace . like a cetacean 's tail , its propeller churned the waves slowly .
taking advantage of this situation , my two companions and i found seats on the ever - deserted platform . in front of us stood the pilothouse , and unless i 'm extremely mistaken , captain nemo must have been inside , steering his nautilus himself .
under my eyes i had the excellent charts of the torres strait that had been surveyed and drawn up by the hydrographic engineer vincendon dumoulin and sublieutenant ( now admiral ) coupvent - desbois , who were part of dumont d'urville 's general staff during his final voyage to circumnavigate the globe . these , along with the efforts of captain king , are the best charts for untangling the snarl of this narrow passageway , and i consulted them with scrupulous care . around the nautilus the sea was boiling furiously . a stream of waves , bearing from southeast to northwest at a speed of two and a half miles per hour , broke over heads of coral emerging here and there .
" that 's one rough sea ! " ned land told me .
" abominable indeed , " i replied , " and hardly suitable for a craft like the nautilus . "
" that damned captain , " the canadian went on , " must really be sure of his course , because if these clumps of coral so much as brush us , they 'll rip our hull into a thousand pieces ! "
i was already wondering if captain nemo , rash to the point of sheer insanity , wanted his ship to tackle the narrows where dumont d'urville 's two sloops of war had gone aground , when he changed direction a second time and cut straight to the west , heading toward gueboroa island .
when i stood up , i saw captain nemo and his chief officer on the platform . they were examining the ship 's circumstances , exchanging a few words in their incomprehensible dialect .
here is what those circumstances entailed . two miles to starboard lay gueboroa island , its coastline curving north to west like an immense arm . to the south and east , heads of coral were already on display , left uncovered by the ebbing waters . we had run aground at full tide and in one of those seas whose tides are moderate , an inconvenient state of affairs for floating the nautilus off . however , the ship had n't suffered in any way , so solidly joined was its hull . but although it could neither sink nor split open , it was in serious danger of being permanently attached to these reefs , and that would have been the finish of captain nemo 's submersible .
" an accident ? " i said to him .
" no , an incident , " he answered me .
" but an incident , " i replied , " that may oblige you to become a resident again of these shores you avoid ! "
captain nemo gave me an odd look and gestured no . which told me pretty clearly that nothing would ever force him to set foot on a land mass again . then he said :
" no , professor aronnax , the nautilus is n't consigned to perdition . it will still carry you through the midst of the ocean 's wonders . our voyage is just beginning , and i 've no desire to deprive myself so soon of the pleasure of your company . "
" even so , captain nemo , " i went on , ignoring his ironic turn of phrase , " the nautilus has run aground at a moment when the sea is full . now then , the tides are n't strong in the pacific , and if you ca n't unballast the nautilus , which seems impossible to me , i do n't see how it will float off . "
" well , sir ? " ned land said to me , coming up after the captain 's departure .
" well , ned my friend , we 'll serenely wait for the tide on the 9th , because it seems the moon will have the good nature to float us away ! "
" as simple as that ? "
" as simple as that . "
" so our captain is n't going to drop his anchors , put his engines on the chains , and do anything to haul us off ? "
" since the tide will be sufficient , " conseil replied simply .
the canadian stared at conseil , then he shrugged his shoulders . the seaman in him was talking now .
" sir , " he answered , " you can trust me when i say this hunk of iron will never navigate again , on the seas or under them . it 's only fit to be sold for its weight . so i think it 's time we gave captain nemo the slip . "
" but could n't we at least get the lay of the land ? " ned went on . " here 's an island . on this island there are trees . under those trees land animals loaded with cutlets and roast beef , which i 'd be happy to sink my teeth into . "
" in this instance our friend ned is right , " conseil said , " and i side with his views . could n't master persuade his friend captain nemo to send the three of us ashore , if only so our feet do n't lose the knack of treading on the solid parts of our planet ? "
" i can ask him , " i replied , " but he 'll refuse . "
" let master take the risk , " conseil said , " and we 'll know where we stand on the captain 's affability . "
the skiff was put at our disposal for the next morning . i hardly needed to ask whether captain nemo would be coming along . i likewise assumed that no crewmen would be assigned to us , that ned land would be in sole charge of piloting the longboat . besides , the shore lay no more than two miles off , and it would be child 's play for the canadian to guide that nimble skiff through those rows of reefs so ill - fated for big ships .
ned land could n't conceal his glee . he was a prisoner escaping from prison and never dreaming he would need to reenter it .
" you glutton , " conseil replied , " you 're making my mouth water ! "
" it remains to be seen , " i said , " whether these forests do contain game , and if the types of game are n't of such size that they can hunt the hunter . "
" fine , professor aronnax ! " replied the canadian , whose teeth seemed to be as honed as the edge of an ax . " but if there 's no other quadruped on this island , i 'll eat tiger -- tiger sirloin . "
" our friend ned grows disturbing , " conseil replied .
" whatever it is , " ned land went on , " any animal having four feet without feathers , or two feet with feathers , will be greeted by my very own one - gun salute . "
" oh good ! " i replied . " the reckless mr . land is at it again ! "
" do n't worry , professor aronnax , just keep rowing ! " the canadian replied . " i only need twenty - five minutes to serve you one of my own special creations . "
by 8:30 the nautilus 's skiff had just run gently aground on a sandy strand , after successfully clearing the ring of coral that surrounds gueboroa island .
chapter 21
some days ashore
" excellent ! " ned land said .
" exquisite ! " conseil replied .
" and i do n't think , " the canadian said , " that your nemo would object to us stashing a cargo of coconuts aboard his vessel ? "
" i imagine not , " i replied , " but he wo n't want to sample them . "
" too bad for him ! " conseil said .
" and plenty good for us ! " ned land shot back . " there 'll be more left over ! "
" master is right , " conseil replied , " and i propose that we set aside three places in our longboat : one for fruit , another for vegetables , and a third for venison , of which i still have n't glimpsed the tiniest specimen . "
" do n't give up so easily , conseil , " the canadian replied .
" so let 's continue our excursion , " i went on , " but keep a sharp lookout . this island seems uninhabited , but it still might harbor certain individuals who are n't so finicky about the sort of game they eat ! "
" hee hee ! " ned put in , with a meaningful movement of his jaws .
" ned ! oh horrors ! " conseil exclaimed .
" ye gods , " the canadian shot back , " i 'm starting to appreciate the charms of cannibalism ! "
" i 'm awfully fond of you , conseil my friend , but not enough to eat you when there 's better food around . "
" then i dare n't delay , " conseil replied . " the hunt is on ! we absolutely must bag some game to placate this man - eater , or one of these mornings master wo n't find enough pieces of his manservant to serve him . "
while exchanging this chitchat , we entered beneath the dark canopies of the forest , and for two hours we explored it in every direction .
we could n't have been luckier in our search for edible vegetation , and some of the most useful produce in the tropical zones supplied us with a valuable foodstuff missing on board .
i mean the breadfruit tree , which is quite abundant on gueboroa island , and there i chiefly noted the seedless variety that in malaysia is called " rima . "
this tree is distinguished from other trees by a straight trunk forty feet high . to the naturalist 's eye , its gracefully rounded crown , formed of big multilobed leaves , was enough to denote the artocarpus that has been so successfully transplanted to the mascarene islands east of madagascar . from its mass of greenery , huge globular fruit stood out , a decimeter wide and furnished on the outside with creases that assumed a hexangular pattern . it 's a handy plant that nature gives to regions lacking in wheat ; without needing to be cultivated , it bears fruit eight months out of the year .
" sample some , ned my friend , sample all you like . we 're here to conduct experiments , let 's conduct them . "
" it wo n't take a minute , " the canadian replied .
this fruit contained no pits . conseil brought a dozen of them to ned land , who cut them into thick slices and placed them over a fire of live coals , all the while repeating :
" you 'll see , sir , how tasty this bread is ! "
" especially since we 've gone without baked goods for so long , " conseil said .
" it 's more than just bread , " the canadian added . " it 's a dainty pastry . you 've never eaten any , sir ? "
" no , ned . "
" all right , get ready for something downright delectable ! if you do n't come back for seconds , i 'm no longer the king of harpooners ! "
after a few minutes , the parts of the fruit exposed to the fire were completely toasted . on the inside there appeared some white pasta , a sort of soft bread center whose flavor reminded me of artichoke .
this bread was excellent , i must admit , and i ate it with great pleasure .
" unfortunately , " i said , " this pasta wo n't stay fresh , so it seems pointless to make a supply for on board . "
" by thunder , sir ! " ned land exclaimed . " there you go , talking like a naturalist , but meantime i 'll be acting like a baker ! conseil , harvest some of this fruit to take with us when we go back . "
" and how will you prepare it ? " i asked the canadian .
" i 'll make a fermented batter from its pulp that 'll keep indefinitely without spoiling . when i want some , i 'll just cook it in the galley on board -- it'll have a slightly tart flavor , but you 'll find it excellent . "
" so , mr . ned , i see that this bread is all we need-- "
" not quite , professor , " the canadian replied . " we need some fruit to go with it , or at least some vegetables . "
" then let 's look for fruit and vegetables . "
when our breadfruit harvesting was done , we took to the trail to complete this " dry - land dinner . "
we did n't search in vain , and near noontime we had an ample supply of bananas . this delicious produce from the torrid zones ripens all year round , and malaysians , who give them the name " pisang , " eat them without bothering to cook them . in addition to bananas , we gathered some enormous jackfruit with a very tangy flavor , some tasty mangoes , and some pineapples of unbelievable size . but this foraging took up a good deal of our time , which , even so , we had no cause to regret .
conseil kept ned under observation . the harpooner walked in the lead , and during his stroll through this forest , he gathered with sure hands some excellent fruit that should have completed his provisions .
" so , " conseil asked , " you have everything you need , ned my friend ? "
" humph ! " the canadian put in .
" what ! you 're complaining ? "
" all this vegetation does n't make a meal , " ned replied . " just side dishes , dessert . but where 's the soup course ? where 's the roast ? "
" right , " i said . " ned promised us cutlets , which seems highly questionable to me . "
" and if not today , then tomorrow , because we must n't wander too far off , " conseil added . " that 's why i propose that we return to the skiff . "
" what ! already ! " ned exclaimed .
" we ought to be back before nightfall , " i said .
" but what hour is it , then ? " the canadian asked .
" two o'clock at least , " conseil replied .
" how time flies on solid ground ! " exclaimed mr . ned land with a sigh of regret .
" off we go ! " conseil replied .
so we returned through the forest , and we completed our harvest by making a clean sweep of some palm cabbages that had to be picked from the crowns of their trees , some small beans that i recognized as the " abrou " of the malaysians , and some high - quality yams .
they were sago palms , vegetation that grows without being cultivated ; like mulberry trees , they reproduce by means of shoots and seeds .
for the time being , ned land was content to chop these trunks into pieces , as if he were making firewood ; later he would extract the flour by sifting it through cloth to separate it from its fibrous ligaments , let it dry out in the sun , and leave it to harden inside molds .
finally , at five o'clock in the afternoon , laden with all our treasures , we left the island beach and half an hour later pulled alongside the nautilus . nobody appeared on our arrival . the enormous sheet - iron cylinder seemed deserted . our provisions loaded on board , i went below to my stateroom . there i found my supper ready . i ate and then fell asleep .
the next day , january 6 : nothing new on board . not a sound inside , not a sign of life . the skiff stayed alongside in the same place we had left it . we decided to return to gueboroa island . ned land hoped for better luck in his hunting than on the day before , and he wanted to visit a different part of the forest .
by sunrise we were off . carried by an inbound current , the longboat reached the island in a matter of moments .
we disembarked , and thinking it best to abide by the canadian 's instincts , we followed ned land , whose long legs threatened to outpace us .
ned land went westward up the coast ; then , fording some stream beds , he reached open plains that were bordered by wonderful forests . some kingfishers lurked along the watercourses , but they did n't let us approach . their cautious behavior proved to me that these winged creatures knew where they stood on bipeds of our species , and i concluded that if this island was n't inhabited , at least human beings paid it frequent visits .
after crossing a pretty lush prairie , we arrived on the outskirts of a small wood , enlivened by the singing and soaring of a large number of birds .
" still , they 're merely birds , " conseil said .
" but some are edible , " the harpooner replied .
" wrong , ned my friend , " conseil answered , " because i see only ordinary parrots here . "
" conseil my friend , " ned replied in all seriousness , " parrots are like pheasant to people with nothing else on their plates . "
" and i might add , " i said , " that when these birds are properly cooked , they 're at least worth a stab of the fork . "
after crossing through a moderately dense thicket , we again found some plains obstructed by bushes . there i saw some magnificent birds soaring aloft , the arrangement of their long feathers causing them to head into the wind . their undulating flight , the grace of their aerial curves , and the play of their colors allured and delighted the eye . i had no trouble identifying them .
" birds of paradise ! " i exclaimed .
" order passeriforma , division clystomora , " conseil replied .
" partridge family ? " ned land asked .
" i doubt it , mr . land . nevertheless , i 'm counting on your dexterity to catch me one of these delightful representatives of tropical nature ! "
" i 'll give it a try , professor , though i 'm handier with a harpoon than a rifle . "
" they taste like chicken stuffed with truffles , " conseil said .
" all right , ned , " i asked the canadian , " now what do you need ? "
" nor i , ned , until i 've caught a bird of paradise . "
" then let 's keep hunting , " conseil replied , " but while heading back to the sea . we 've arrived at the foothills of these mountains , and i think we 'll do better if we return to the forest regions . "
it was good advice and we took it . after an hour 's walk we reached a genuine sago palm forest . a few harmless snakes fled underfoot . birds of paradise stole off at our approach , and i was in real despair of catching one when conseil , walking in the lead , stooped suddenly , gave a triumphant shout , and came back to me , carrying a magnificent bird of paradise .
" oh bravo , conseil ! " i exclaimed .
" master is too kind , " conseil replied .
" not at all , my boy . that was a stroke of genius , catching one of these live birds with your bare hands ! "
" if master will examine it closely , he 'll see that i deserve no great praise . "
" and why not , conseil ? "
" because this bird is as drunk as a lord . "
" drunk ? "
" yes , master , drunk from the nutmegs it was devouring under that nutmeg tree where i caught it . see , ned my friend , see the monstrous results of intemperance ! "
" damnation ! " the canadian shot back . " considering the amount of gin i 've had these past two months , you 've got nothing to complain about ! "
how i wished i could take this superb bird of paradise back to paris , to make a gift of it to the zoo at the botanical gardens , which does n't own a single live specimen .
" so it must be a rarity or something ? " the canadian asked , in the tone of a hunter who , from the viewpoint of his art , gives the game a pretty low rating .
" a great rarity , my gallant comrade , and above all very hard to capture alive . and even after they 're dead , there 's still a major market for these birds . so the natives have figured out how to create fake ones , like people create fake pearls or diamonds . "
" what ! " conseil exclaimed . " they make counterfeit birds of paradise ? "
" yes , conseil . "
" and is master familiar with how the islanders go about it ? "
" good enough ! " ned land put in . " if it is n't the right bird , it 's still the right feathers , and so long as the merchandise is n't meant to be eaten , i see no great harm ! "
but if my desires were fulfilled by the capture of this bird of paradise , those of our canadian huntsman remained unsatisfied . luckily , near two o'clock ned land brought down a magnificent wild pig of the type the natives call " bari - outang . " this animal came in the nick of time for us to bag some real quadruped meat , and it was warmly welcomed . ned land proved himself quite gloriously with his gunshot . hit by an electric bullet , the pig dropped dead on the spot .
these animals were small in stature . they were a species of those " rabbit kangaroos " that usually dwell in the hollows of trees and are tremendously fast ; but although of moderate dimensions , they at least furnish a meat that 's highly prized .
we were thoroughly satisfied with the results of our hunting . a gleeful ned proposed that we return the next day to this magic island , which he planned to depopulate of its every edible quadruped . but he was reckoning without events .
by six o'clock in the evening , we were back on the beach . the skiff was aground in its usual place . the nautilus , looking like a long reef , emerged from the waves two miles offshore .
but i catch myself following in the canadian 's footsteps . look at me -- in ecstasy over freshly grilled pork ! please grant me a pardon as i 've already granted one to mr . land , and on the same grounds !
" what if we do n't return to the nautilus this evening ? " conseil said .
" what if we never return to it ? " ned land added .
just then a stone whizzed toward us , landed at our feet , and cut short the harpooner 's proposition .
chapter 22
the lightning bolts of captain nemo
without standing up , we stared in the direction of the forest , my hand stopping halfway to my mouth , ned land 's completing its assignment .
" stones do n't fall from the sky , " conseil said , " or else they deserve to be called meteorites . "
we all three stood up , rifles to our shoulders , ready to answer any attack .
" apes maybe ? " ned land exclaimed .
" nearly , " conseil replied . " savages . "
" head for the skiff ! " i said , moving toward the sea .
indeed , it was essential to beat a retreat because some twenty natives , armed with bows and slings , appeared barely a hundred paces off , on the outskirts of a thicket that masked the horizon to our right .
the skiff was aground ten fathoms away from us .
the savages approached without running , but they favored us with a show of the greatest hostility . it was raining stones and arrows .
ned land was unwilling to leave his provisions behind , and despite the impending danger , he clutched his pig on one side , his kangaroos on the other , and scampered off with respectable speed .
twenty minutes later we boarded ship . the hatches were open . after mooring the skiff , we reentered the nautilus 's interior .
i went below to the lounge , from which some chords were wafting . captain nemo was there , leaning over the organ , deep in a musical trance .
" captain ! " i said to him .
he did n't hear me .
" captain ! " i went on , touching him with my hand .
he trembled , and turning around :
" yes , captain , " i replied , " but unfortunately we 've brought back a horde of bipeds whose proximity worries me . "
" what sort of bipeds ? "
" savages . "
" but captain-- "
" speaking for myself , sir , i 've encountered them everywhere . "
" well then , " i replied , " if you do n't want to welcome them aboard the nautilus , you 'd better take some precautions ! "
" but there are a large number of these natives . "
" what 's your count ? "
" at least a hundred . "
" professor aronnax , " replied captain nemo , whose fingers took their places again on the organ keys , " if every islander in papua were to gather on that beach , the nautilus would still have nothing to fear from their attacks ! "
the captain 's fingers then ran over the instrument 's keyboard , and i noticed that he touched only its black keys , which gave his melodies a basically scottish color . soon he had forgotten my presence and was lost in a reverie that i no longer tried to dispel .
i climbed onto the platform . night had already fallen , because in this low latitude the sun sets quickly , without any twilight . i could see gueboroa island only dimly . but numerous fires had been kindled on the beach , attesting that the natives had no thoughts of leaving it .
the night passed without mishap . no doubt the papuans had been frightened off by the mere sight of this monster aground in the bay , because our hatches stayed open , offering easy access to the nautilus 's interior .
at six o'clock in the morning , january 8 , i climbed onto the platform . the morning shadows were lifting . the island was soon on view through the dissolving mists , first its beaches , then its summits .
one of these chieftains came fairly close to the nautilus , examining it with care . he must have been a " mado " of high rank , because he paraded in a mat of banana leaves that had ragged edges and was accented with bright colors .
i could easily have picked off this islander , he stood at such close range ; but i thought it best to wait for an actual show of hostility . between europeans and savages , it 's acceptable for europeans to shoot back but not to attack first .
during this whole time of low tide , the islanders lurked near the nautilus , but they were n't boisterous . i often heard them repeat the word " assai , " and from their gestures i understood they were inviting me to go ashore , an invitation i felt obliged to decline .
so the skiff did n't leave shipside that day , much to the displeasure of mr . land who could n't complete his provisions . the adroit canadian spent his time preparing the meat and flour products he had brought from gueboroa island . as for the savages , they went back to shore near eleven o'clock in the morning , when the heads of coral began to disappear under the waves of the rising tide . but i saw their numbers swell considerably on the beach . it was likely that they had come from neighboring islands or from the mainland of papua proper . however , i did n't see one local dugout canoe .
having nothing better to do , i decided to dredge these beautiful , clear waters , which exhibited a profusion of shells , zoophytes , and open - sea plants . besides , it was the last day the nautilus would spend in these waterways , if , tomorrow , it still floated off to the open sea as captain nemo had promised .
so i summoned conseil , who brought me a small , light dragnet similar to those used in oyster fishing .
" they 're cannibals even so , my boy . "
" fine , conseil ! and i agree that there are honorable cannibals who decently devour their prisoners . however , i 'm opposed to being devoured , even in all decency , so i 'll keep on my guard , especially since the nautilus 's commander seems to be taking no precautions . and now let 's get to work ! "
for two hours our fishing proceeded energetically but without bringing up any rarities . our dragnet was filled with midas abalone , harp shells , obelisk snails , and especially the finest hammer shells i had seen to that day . we also gathered in a few sea cucumbers , some pearl oysters , and a dozen small turtles that we saved for the ship 's pantry .
but just when i least expected it , i laid my hands on a wonder , a natural deformity i 'd have to call it , something very seldom encountered . conseil had just made a cast of the dragnet , and his gear had come back up loaded with a variety of fairly ordinary seashells , when suddenly he saw me plunge my arms swiftly into the net , pull out a shelled animal , and give a conchological yell , in other words , the most piercing yell a human throat can produce .
" eh ? what happened to master ? " conseil asked , very startled . " did master get bitten ? "
" no , my boy , but i 'd gladly have sacrificed a finger for such a find ! "
" what find ? "
" this shell , " i said , displaying the subject of my triumph .
" but that 's simply an olive shell of the ' tent olive ' species , genus oliva , order pectinibranchia , class gastropoda , branch mollusca-- "
" yes , yes , conseil ! but instead of coiling from right to left , this olive shell rolls from left to right ! "
" it ca n't be ! " conseil exclaimed .
" yes , my boy , it 's a left - handed shell ! "
" a left - handed shell ! " conseil repeated , his heart pounding .
" look at its spiral ! "
i gave a yell of despair ! conseil pounced on his rifle and aimed at a savage swinging a sling just ten meters away from him . i tried to stop him , but his shot went off and shattered a bracelet of amulets dangling from the islander 's arm .
" conseil ! " i shouted . " conseil ! "
" eh ? what ? did n't master see that this man - eater initiated the attack ? "
" a shell is n't worth a human life ! " i told him .
" oh , the rascal ! " conseil exclaimed . " i 'd rather he cracked my shoulder ! "
conseil was in dead earnest , but i did n't subscribe to his views . however , the situation had changed in only a short time and we had n't noticed . now some twenty dugout canoes were surrounding the nautilus . hollowed from tree trunks , these dugouts were long , narrow , and well designed for speed , keeping their balance by means of two bamboo poles that floated on the surface of the water . they were maneuvered by skillful , half - naked paddlers , and i viewed their advance with definite alarm .
it was obvious these papuans had already entered into relations with europeans and knew their ships . but this long , iron cylinder lying in the bay , with no masts or funnels -- what were they to make of it ? nothing good , because at first they kept it at a respectful distance . however , seeing that it stayed motionless , they regained confidence little by little and tried to become more familiar with it . now then , it was precisely this familiarity that we needed to prevent . since our weapons made no sound when they went off , they would have only a moderate effect on these islanders , who reputedly respect nothing but noisy mechanisms . without thunderclaps , lightning bolts would be much less frightening , although the danger lies in the flash , not the noise .
just then the dugout canoes drew nearer to the nautilus , and a cloud of arrows burst over us .
" fire and brimstone , it 's hailing ! " conseil said . " and poisoned hail perhaps ! "
" we 've got to alert captain nemo , " i said , reentering the hatch .
i went below to the lounge . i found no one there . i ventured a knock at the door opening into the captain 's stateroom .
the word " enter ! " answered me . i did so and found captain nemo busy with calculations in which there was no shortage of x and other algebraic signs .
" am i disturbing you ? " i said out of politeness .
" correct , professor aronnax , " the captain answered me . " but i imagine you have pressing reasons for looking me up ? "
" very pressing . native dugout canoes are surrounding us , and in a few minutes we 're sure to be assaulted by several hundred savages . "
" ah ! " captain nemo put in serenely . " they 've come in their dugouts ? "
" yes , sir . "
" well , sir , closing the hatches should do the trick . "
" precisely , and that 's what i came to tell you-- "
" nothing easier , " captain nemo said . and he pressed an electric button , transmitting an order to the crew 's quarters .
" there , sir , all under control ! " he told me after a few moments . " the skiff is in place and the hatches are closed . i do n't imagine you 're worried that these gentlemen will stave in walls that shells from your frigate could n't breach ? "
" no , captain , but one danger still remains . "
" what 's that , sir ? "
" tomorrow at about this time , we 'll need to reopen the hatches to renew the nautilus 's air . "
" no argument , sir , since our craft breathes in the manner favored by cetaceans . "
" but if these papuans are occupying the platform at that moment , i do n't see how you can prevent them from entering . "
" then , sir , you assume they 'll board the ship ? "
" i 'm certain of it . "
" well , sir , let them come aboard . i see no reason to prevent them . deep down they 're just poor devils , these papuans , and i do n't want my visit to gueboroa island to cost the life of a single one of these unfortunate people ! "
on this note i was about to withdraw ; but captain nemo detained me and invited me to take a seat next to him . he questioned me with interest on our excursions ashore and on our hunting , but seemed not to understand the canadian 's passionate craving for red meat . then our conversation skimmed various subjects , and without being more forthcoming , captain nemo proved more affable .
as he spoke , captain nemo seemed deeply moved , an emotion i felt was to his credit .
" what your d'urville did on the surface of the sea , " captain nemo told me , " i 've done in the ocean 's interior , but more easily , more completely than he . constantly tossed about by hurricanes , the zealous and the new astrolabe could n't compare with the nautilus , a quiet work room truly at rest in the midst of the waters ! "
" even so , captain , " i said , " there is one major similarity between dumont d'urville 's sloops of war and the nautilus . "
" what 's that , sir ? "
" like them , the nautilus has run aground ! "
" the nautilus is not aground , sir , " captain nemo replied icily . " the nautilus was built to rest on the ocean floor , and i do n't need to undertake the arduous labors , the maneuvers d'urville had to attempt in order to float off his sloops of war . the zealous and the new astrolabe wellnigh perished , but my nautilus is in no danger . tomorrow , on the day stated and at the hour stated , the tide will peacefully lift it off , and it will resume its navigating through the seas . "
" captain , " i said , " i do n't doubt-- "
" tomorrow , " captain nemo added , standing up , " tomorrow at 2:40 in the afternoon , the nautilus will float off and exit the torres strait undamaged . "
" master has no need for my services ? "
" no , my friend . what 's ned land up to ? "
" begging master 's indulgence , " conseil replied , " but our friend ned is concocting a kangaroo pie that will be the eighth wonder ! "
i worked in my stateroom until noon without seeing captain nemo even for an instant . nobody on board seemed to be making any preparations for departure .
i still waited for a while , then i made my way to the main lounge . its timepiece marked 2:30 . in ten minutes the tide would reach its maximum elevation , and if captain nemo had n't made a rash promise , the nautilus would immediately break free . if not , many months might pass before it could leave its coral bed .
but some preliminary vibrations could soon be felt over the boat 's hull . i heard its plating grind against the limestone roughness of that coral base .
" we 're about to depart , " he said .
" ah ! " i put in .
" i 've given orders to open the hatches . "
" what about the papuans ? "
" what about them ? " captain nemo replied , with a light shrug of his shoulders .
" wo n't they come inside the nautilus ? "
" how will they manage that ? "
" by jumping down the hatches you 're about to open . "
" professor aronnax , " captain nemo replied serenely , " the nautilus 's hatches are n't to be entered in that fashion even when they 're open . "
i gaped at the captain .
" you do n't understand ? " he said to me .
" not in the least . "
" well , come along and you 'll see ! "
the hatch lids fell back onto the outer plating . twenty horrible faces appeared . but when the first islander laid hands on the companionway railing , he was flung backward by some invisible power , lord knows what ! he ran off , howling in terror and wildly prancing around .
ten of his companions followed him . all ten met the same fate .
conseil was in ecstasy . carried away by his violent instincts , ned land leaped up the companionway . but as soon as his hands seized the railing , he was thrown backward in his turn .
" damnation ! " he exclaimed . " i 've been struck by a lightning bolt ! "
chapter 23
" aegri somnia "
the following day , january 10 , the nautilus resumed its travels in midwater but at a remarkable speed that i estimated to be at least thirty - five miles per hour . the propeller was going so fast i could neither follow nor count its revolutions .
i thought about how this marvelous electric force not only gave motion , heat , and light to the nautilus but even protected it against outside attack , transforming it into a sacred ark no profane hand could touch without being blasted ; my wonderment was boundless , and it went from the submersible itself to the engineer who had created it .
we were traveling due west and on january 11 we doubled cape wessel , located in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 10 degrees north , the western tip of the gulf of carpentaria . reefs were still numerous but more widely scattered and were fixed on the chart with the greatest accuracy . the nautilus easily avoided the money breakers to port and the victoria reefs to starboard , positioned at longitude 130 degrees on the tenth parallel , which we went along rigorously .
but the nautilus wanted nothing to do with these nasty animals . timor island was visible for barely an instant at noon while the chief officer determined his position . i also caught only a glimpse of little roti island , part of this same group , whose women have a well - established reputation for beauty in the malaysian marketplace .
after our position fix , the nautilus 's latitude bearings were modulated to the southwest . our prow pointed to the indian ocean . where would captain nemo 's fancies take us ? would he head up to the shores of asia ? would he pull nearer to the beaches of europe ? unlikely choices for a man who avoided populated areas ! so would he go down south ? would he double the cape of good hope , then cape horn , and push on to the antarctic pole ? finally , would he return to the seas of the pacific , where his nautilus could navigate freely and easily ? time would tell .
after cruising along the cartier , hibernia , seringapatam , and scott reefs , the solid element 's last exertions against the liquid element , we were beyond all sight of shore by january 14 . the nautilus slowed down in an odd manner , and very unpredictable in its ways , it sometimes swam in the midst of the waters , sometimes drifted on their surface .
and so , by loading up its ballast tanks , or by sinking obliquely with its slanting fins , the nautilus successively reached depths of 3,000 , 4,000 , 5,000 , 7,000 , 9,000 , and 10,000 meters , and the ultimate conclusion from these experiments was that , in all latitudes , the sea had a permanent temperature of 4.5 degrees centigrade at a depth of 1,000 meters .
be that as it may , captain nemo also introduced me to the different data he had obtained on the relative densities of the water in our globe 's chief seas . from this news i derived some personal enlightenment having nothing to do with science .
it happened the morning of january 15 . the captain , with whom i was strolling on the platform , asked me if i knew how salt water differs in density from sea to sea . i said no , adding that there was a lack of rigorous scientific observations on this subject .
" i 've taken such observations , " he told me , " and i can vouch for their reliability . "
" fine , " i replied , " but the nautilus lives in a separate world , and the secrets of its scientists do n't make their way ashore . "
" you 're right , professor , " he told me after a few moments of silence . " this is a separate world . it 's as alien to the earth as the planets accompanying our globe around the sun , and we 'll never become familiar with the work of scientists on saturn or jupiter . but since fate has linked our two lives , i can reveal the results of my observations to you . "
" i 'm all attention , captain . "
aha , i thought , so he ventures into the mediterranean ?
" --1.018 for the waters of the ionian sea , and 1.029 for the waters of the adriatic . "
assuredly , the nautilus did n't avoid the heavily traveled seas of europe , and from this insight i concluded that the ship would take us back -- perhaps very soon -- to more civilized shores . i expected ned land to greet this news with unfeigned satisfaction .
on january 16 the nautilus seemed to have fallen asleep just a few meters beneath the surface of the water . its electric equipment had been turned off , and the motionless propeller let it ride with the waves . i assumed that the crew were busy with interior repairs , required by the engine 's strenuous mechanical action .
my companions and i then witnessed an unusual sight . the panels in the lounge were open , and since the nautilus 's beacon was off , a hazy darkness reigned in the midst of the waters . covered with heavy clouds , the stormy sky gave only the faintest light to the ocean 's upper strata .
some magic lay behind this dazzling sight ! perhaps some atmospheric condition had intensified this phenomenon ? perhaps a storm had been unleashed on the surface of the waves ? but only a few meters down , the nautilus felt no tempest 's fury , and the ship rocked peacefully in the midst of the calm waters .
so this way of living began to seem simple and natural to us , and we no longer envisioned a different lifestyle on the surface of the planet earth , when something happened to remind us of our strange circumstances .
on january 18 the nautilus lay in longitude 105 degrees and latitude 15 degrees south . the weather was threatening , the sea rough and billowy . the wind was blowing a strong gust from the east . the barometer , which had been falling for some days , forecast an approaching struggle of the elements .
i had climbed onto the platform just as the chief officer was taking his readings of hour angles . out of habit i waited for him to pronounce his daily phrase . but that day it was replaced by a different phrase , just as incomprehensible . almost at once i saw captain nemo appear , lift his spyglass , and inspect the horizon .
as for me , i stared industriously in the direction under observation but without spotting a thing . sky and water merged into a perfectly clean horizon line .
meanwhile captain nemo strolled from one end of the platform to the other , not glancing at me , perhaps not even seeing me . his step was firm but less regular than usual . sometimes he would stop , cross his arms over his chest , and observe the sea . what could he be looking for over that immense expanse ? by then the nautilus lay hundreds of miles from the nearest coast !
the chief officer kept lifting his spyglass and stubbornly examining the horizon , walking up and down , stamping his foot , in his nervous agitation a sharp contrast to his superior .
but this mystery would inevitably be cleared up , and soon , because captain nemo gave orders to increase speed ; at once the engine stepped up its drive power , setting the propeller in swifter rotation .
i spun around . captain nemo was standing before me , but i almost did n't recognize him . his facial features were transfigured . gleaming with dark fire , his eyes had shrunk beneath his frowning brow . his teeth were half bared . his rigid body , clenched fists , and head drawn between his shoulders , all attested to a fierce hate breathing from every pore . he did n't move . my spyglass fell from his hand and rolled at his feet .
had i accidentally caused these symptoms of anger ? did this incomprehensible individual think i had detected some secret forbidden to guests on the nautilus ?
no ! i was n't the subject of his hate because he was n't even looking at me ; his eyes stayed stubbornly focused on that inscrutable point of the horizon .
" professor aronnax , " he told me in a tone of some urgency , " i ask that you now honor one of the binding agreements between us . "
" which one , captain ? "
" you and your companions must be placed in confinement until i see fit to set you free . "
" you 're in command , " i answered , gaping at him . " but may i address a question to you ? "
" you may not , sir . "
after that , i stopped objecting and started obeying , since resistance was useless .
i went below to the cabin occupied by ned land and conseil , and i informed them of the captain 's decision . i 'll let the reader decide how this news was received by the canadian . in any case , there was no time for explanations . four crewmen were waiting at the door , and they led us to the cell where we had spent our first night aboard the nautilus .
ned land tried to lodge a complaint , but the only answer he got was a door shut in his face .
" will master tell me what this means ? " conseil asked me .
i told my companions what had happened . they were as astonished as i was , but no wiser .
then i sank into deep speculation , and captain nemo 's strange facial seizure kept haunting me . i was incapable of connecting two ideas in logical order , and i had strayed into the most absurd hypotheses , when i was snapped out of my mental struggles by these words from ned land : " well , look here ! lunch is served ! "
indeed , the table had been laid . apparently captain nemo had given this order at the same time he commanded the nautilus to pick up speed .
" will master allow me to make him a recommendation ? " conseil asked me .
" yes , my boy , " i replied .
" well , master needs to eat his lunch ! it 's prudent , because we have no idea what the future holds . "
" you 're right , conseil . "
" unfortunately , " ned land said , " they 've only given us the standard menu . "
" ned my friend , " conseil answered , " what would you say if they 'd given us no lunch at all ? "
this dose of sanity cut the harpooner 's complaints clean off .
we sat down at the table . our meal proceeded pretty much in silence . i ate very little . conseil , everlastingly prudent , " force - fed " himself ; and despite the menu , ned land did n't waste a bite . then , lunch over , each of us propped himself in a corner .
i tried to fight off this drowsiness . it was impossible . my breathing grew weaker . i felt a mortal chill freeze my dull , nearly paralyzed limbs . like little domes of lead , my lids fell over my eyes . i could n't raise them . a morbid sleep , full of hallucinations , seized my whole being . then the visions disappeared and left me in utter oblivion .
chapter 24
the coral realm
i then considered leaving my stateroom . was i free or still a prisoner ? perfectly free . i opened my door , headed down the gangways , and climbed the central companionway . hatches that had been closed the day before were now open . i arrived on the platform .
ned land and conseil were there waiting for me . i questioned them . they knew nothing . lost in a heavy sleep of which they had no memory , they were quite startled to be back in their cabin .
as for the nautilus , it seemed as tranquil and mysterious as ever . it was cruising on the surface of the waves at a moderate speed . nothing seemed to have changed on board .
ned land observed the sea with his penetrating eyes . it was deserted . the canadian sighted nothing new on the horizon , neither sail nor shore . a breeze was blowing noisily from the west , and disheveled by the wind , long billows made the submersible roll very noticeably .
after renewing its air , the nautilus stayed at an average depth of fifteen meters , enabling it to return quickly to the surface of the waves . and , contrary to custom , it executed such a maneuver several times during that day of january 19 . the chief officer would then climb onto the platform , and his usual phrase would ring through the ship 's interior .
as for captain nemo , he did n't appear . of the other men on board , i saw only my emotionless steward , who served me with his usual mute efficiency .
near two o'clock i was busy organizing my notes in the lounge , when the captain opened the door and appeared . i bowed to him . he gave me an almost imperceptible bow in return , without saying a word to me . i resumed my work , hoping he might give me some explanation of the previous afternoon 's events . he did nothing of the sort . i stared at him . his face looked exhausted ; his reddened eyes had n't been refreshed by sleep ; his facial features expressed profound sadness , real chagrin . he walked up and down , sat and stood , picked up a book at random , discarded it immediately , consulted his instruments without taking his customary notes , and seemed unable to rest easy for an instant .
finally he came over to me and said :
" are you a physician , professor aronnax ? "
this inquiry was so unexpected that i stared at him a good while without replying .
" are you a physician ? " he repeated . " several of your scientific colleagues took their degrees in medicine , such as gratiolet , moquin - tandon , and others . "
" excellent , sir . "
my reply obviously pleased captain nemo . but not knowing what he was driving at , i waited for further questions , ready to reply as circumstances dictated .
" someone is sick ? "
" yes . "
" i 'm ready to go with you . "
" come . "
i admit that my heart was pounding . lord knows why , but i saw a definite connection between this sick crewman and yesterday 's happenings , and the mystery of those events concerned me at least as much as the man 's sickness .
it was a horrible wound . the cranium had been smashed open by some blunt instrument , leaving the naked brains exposed , and the cerebral matter had suffered deep abrasions . blood clots had formed in this dissolving mass , taking on the color of wine dregs . both contusion and concussion of the brain had occurred . the sick man 's breathing was labored , and muscle spasms quivered in his face . cerebral inflammation was complete and had brought on a paralysis of movement and sensation .
" how did he get this wound ? " i asked him .
i hesitated to speak my mind .
" you may talk freely , " the captain told me . " this man does n't understand french . "
i took a last look at the wounded man , then i replied :
" this man will be dead in two hours . "
" nothing can save him ? "
" nothing . "
" you may go , professor aronnax , " captain nemo told me .
i left the captain in the dying man 's cabin and i repaired to my stateroom , very moved by this scene . all day long i was aquiver with gruesome forebodings . that night i slept poorly , and between my fitful dreams , i thought i heard a distant moaning , like a funeral dirge . was it a prayer for the dead , murmured in that language i could n't understand ?
the next morning i climbed on deck . captain nemo was already there . as soon as he saw me , he came over .
" with my companions ? " i asked .
" if they 're agreeable . "
" we 're yours to command , captain . "
" then kindly put on your diving suits . "
as for the dead or dying man , he had n't come into the picture . i rejoined ned land and conseil . i informed them of captain nemo 's proposition . conseil was eager to accept , and this time the canadian proved perfectly amenable to going with us .
a gentle slope gravitated to an uneven bottom whose depth was about fifteen fathoms . this bottom was completely different from the one i had visited during my first excursion under the waters of the pacific ocean . here i saw no fine - grained sand , no underwater prairies , not one open - sea forest . i immediately recognized the wondrous region in which captain nemo did the honors that day . it was the coral realm .
we turned on our ruhmkorff devices and went along a coral shoal in the process of forming , which , given time , will someday close off this whole part of the indian ocean . our path was bordered by hopelessly tangled bushes , formed from snarls of shrubs all covered with little star - shaped , white - streaked flowers . only , contrary to plants on shore , these tree forms become attached to rocks on the seafloor by heading from top to bottom .
but as the bushes shrank , the tree forms magnified . actual petrified thickets and long alcoves from some fantastic school of architecture kept opening up before our steps . captain nemo entered beneath a dark gallery whose gentle slope took us to a depth of 100 meters . the light from our glass coils produced magical effects at times , lingering on the wrinkled roughness of some natural arch , or some overhang suspended like a chandelier , which our lamps flecked with fiery sparks . amid these shrubs of precious coral , i observed other polyps no less unusual : melita coral , rainbow coral with jointed outgrowths , then a few tufts of genus corallina , some green and others red , actually a type of seaweed encrusted with limestone salts , which , after long disputes , naturalists have finally placed in the vegetable kingdom . but as one intellectual has remarked , " here , perhaps , is the actual point where life rises humbly out of slumbering stone , but without breaking away from its crude starting point . "
meanwhile captain nemo had called a halt . my companions and i stopped walking , and turning around , i saw the crewmen form a semicircle around their leader . looking with greater care , i observed that four of them were carrying on their shoulders an object that was oblong in shape .
at this locality we stood in the center of a huge clearing surrounded by the tall tree forms of this underwater forest . our lamps cast a sort of brilliant twilight over the area , making inordinately long shadows on the seafloor . past the boundaries of the clearing , the darkness deepened again , relieved only by little sparkles given off by the sharp crests of coral .
in the middle of the clearing , on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks , there stood a cross of coral , extending long arms you would have thought were made of petrified blood .
at a signal from captain nemo , one of his men stepped forward and , a few feet from this cross , detached a mattock from his belt and began to dig a hole .
i finally understood ! this clearing was a cemetery , this hole a grave , that oblong object the body of the man who must have died during the night ! captain nemo and his men had come to bury their companion in this communal resting place on the inaccessible ocean floor !
no ! my mind was reeling as never before ! never had ideas of such impact raced through my brain ! i did n't want to see what my eyes saw !
meanwhile the grave digging went slowly . fish fled here and there as their retreat was disturbed . i heard the pick ringing on the limestone soil , its iron tip sometimes giving off sparks when it hit a stray piece of flint on the sea bottom . the hole grew longer , wider , and soon was deep enough to receive the body .
the grave was then covered over with the rubble dug from the seafloor , and it formed a low mound .
then the funeral party went back up the path to the nautilus , returning beneath the arches of the forest , through the thickets , along the coral bushes , going steadily higher .
finally the ship 's rays appeared . their luminous trail guided us to the nautilus . by one o'clock we had returned .
after changing clothes , i climbed onto the platform , and in the grip of dreadfully obsessive thoughts , i sat next to the beacon .
captain nemo rejoined me . i stood up and said to him :
" so , as i predicted , that man died during the night ? "
" yes , professor aronnax , " captain nemo replied .
" and now he rests beside his companions in that coral cemetery ? "
" yes , forgotten by the world but not by us ! we dig the graves , then entrust the polyps with sealing away our dead for eternity ! "
and with a sudden gesture , the captain hid his face in his clenched fists , vainly trying to hold back a sob . then he added :
" there lies our peaceful cemetery , hundreds of feet beneath the surface of the waves ! "
" at least , captain , your dead can sleep serenely there , out of the reach of sharks ! "
" yes , sir , " captain nemo replied solemnly , " of sharks and men ! "
chapter 1 the indian ocean
as for me , i was no longer content with the hypotheses that satisfied conseil . that fine lad persisted in seeing the nautilus 's commander as merely one of those unappreciated scientists who repay humanity 's indifference with contempt . for conseil , the captain was still a misunderstood genius who , tired of the world 's deceptions , had been driven to take refuge in this inaccessible environment where he was free to follow his instincts . but to my mind , this hypothesis explained only one side of captain nemo .
nevertheless , i 'm well aware that the nautilus is drawing near to populated shores , and if some chance for salvation becomes available to us , it would be sheer cruelty to sacrifice my companions to my passion for the unknown . i must go with them , perhaps even guide them . but will this opportunity ever arise ? the human being , robbed of his free will , craves such an opportunity ; but the scientist , forever inquisitive , dreads it .
all in all , we enjoyed a highly satisfactory state of health . the diet on board agreed with us perfectly , and for my part , i could easily have gone without those changes of pace that ned land , in a spirit of protest , kept taxing his ingenuity to supply us . what 's more , in this constant temperature we did n't even have to worry about catching colds . besides , the ship had a good stock of the madrepore dendrophylia , known in provence by the name sea fennel , and a poultice made from the dissolved flesh of its polyps will furnish an excellent cough medicine .
for some days we saw a large number of aquatic birds with webbed feet , known as gulls or sea mews . some were skillfully slain , and when cooked in a certain fashion , they make a very acceptable platter of water game . among the great wind riders -- carried over long distances from every shore and resting on the waves from their exhausting flights-- i spotted some magnificent albatross , birds belonging to the longipennes ( long - winged ) family , whose discordant calls sound like the braying of an ass . the totipalmes ( fully webbed ) family was represented by swift frigate birds , nimbly catching fish at the surface , and by numerous tropic birds of the genus phaeton , among others the red - tailed tropic bird , the size of a pigeon , its white plumage shaded with pink tints that contrasted with its dark - hued wings .
the nautilus 's nets hauled up several types of sea turtle from the hawksbill genus with arching backs whose scales are highly prized . diving easily , these reptiles can remain a good while underwater by closing the fleshy valves located at the external openings of their nasal passages . when they were captured , some hawksbills were still asleep inside their carapaces , a refuge from other marine animals . the flesh of these turtles was nothing memorable , but their eggs made an excellent feast .
as for fish , they always filled us with wonderment when , staring through the open panels , we could unveil the secrets of their aquatic lives . i noted several species i had n't previously been able to observe .
from january 21 to the 23rd , the nautilus traveled at the rate of 250 leagues in twenty - four hours , hence 540 miles at twenty - two miles per hour . if , during our trip , we were able to identify these different varieties of fish , it 's because they were attracted by our electric light and tried to follow alongside ; but most of them were outdistanced by our speed and soon fell behind ; temporarily , however , a few managed to keep pace in the nautilus 's waters .
soon keeling island disappeared below the horizon , and our course was set to the northwest , toward the tip of the indian peninsula .
" well , sir , ca n't we manage without his permission ? "
on january 25 , the ocean being completely deserted , the nautilus spent the day on the surface , churning the waves with its powerful propeller and making them spurt to great heights . under these conditions , who would n't have mistaken it for a gigantic cetacean ? i spent three - quarters of the day on the platform . i stared at the sea . nothing on the horizon , except near four o'clock in the afternoon a long steamer to the west , running on our opposite tack . its masting was visible for an instant , but it could n't have seen the nautilus because we were lying too low in the water . i imagine that steamboat belonged to the peninsular & oriental line , which provides service from the island of ceylon to sidney , also calling at king george sound and melbourne .
at five o'clock in the afternoon , just before that brief twilight that links day with night in tropical zones , conseil and i marveled at an unusual sight .
it was a delightful animal whose discovery , according to the ancients , is a sign of good luck . aristotle , athenaeus , pliny , and oppian studied its habits and lavished on its behalf all the scientific poetry of greece and italy . they called it " nautilus " and " pompilius . " but modern science has not endorsed these designations , and this mollusk is now known by the name argonaut .
anyone consulting conseil would soon learn from the gallant lad that the branch mollusca is divided into five classes ; that the first class features the cephalopoda ( whose members are sometimes naked , sometimes covered with a shell ) , which consists of two families , the dibranchiata and the tetrabranchiata , which are distinguished by their number of gills ; that the family dibranchiata includes three genera , the argonaut , the squid , and the cuttlefish , and that the family tetrabranchiata contains only one genus , the nautilus . after this catalog , if some recalcitrant listener confuses the argonaut , which is acetabuliferous ( in other words , a bearer of suction tubes ) , with the nautilus , which is tentaculiferous ( a bearer of tentacles ) , it will be simply unforgivable .
" the argonaut is free to leave its shell , " i told conseil , " but it never does . "
" not unlike captain nemo , " conseil replied sagely . " which is why he should have christened his ship the argonaut . "
for about an hour the nautilus cruised in the midst of this school of mollusks . then , lord knows why , they were gripped with a sudden fear . as if at a signal , every sail was abruptly lowered ; arms folded , bodies contracted , shells turned over by changing their center of gravity , and the whole flotilla disappeared under the waves . it was instantaneous , and no squadron of ships ever maneuvered with greater togetherness .
just then night fell suddenly , and the waves barely surged in the breeze , spreading placidly around the nautilus 's side plates .
the next day , january 26 , we cut the equator on the 82nd meridian and we reentered the northern hemisphere .
during that day a fearsome school of sharks provided us with an escort . dreadful animals that teem in these seas and make them extremely dangerous . there were port jackson sharks with a brown back , a whitish belly , and eleven rows of teeth , bigeye sharks with necks marked by a large black spot encircled in white and resembling an eye , and isabella sharks whose rounded snouts were strewn with dark speckles . often these powerful animals rushed at the lounge window with a violence less than comforting . by this point ned land had lost all self - control . he wanted to rise to the surface of the waves and harpoon the monsters , especially certain smooth - hound sharks whose mouths were paved with teeth arranged like a mosaic , and some big five - meter tiger sharks that insisted on personally provoking him . but the nautilus soon picked up speed and easily left astern the fastest of these man - eaters .
" that 's called a milk sea , " i told him , " a vast expanse of white waves often seen along the coasts of amboina and in these waterways . "
" but , " conseil asked , " could master tell me the cause of this effect , because i presume this water has n't really changed into milk ! "
" no , my boy , and this whiteness that amazes you is merely due to the presence of myriads of tiny creatures called infusoria , a sort of diminutive glowworm that 's colorless and gelatinous in appearance , as thick as a strand of hair , and no longer than one - fifth of a millimeter . some of these tiny creatures stick together over an area of several leagues . "
" several leagues ! " conseil exclaimed .
" yes , my boy , and do n't even try to compute the number of these infusoria . you wo n't pull it off , because if i 'm not mistaken , certain navigators have cruised through milk seas for more than forty miles . "
i 'm not sure that conseil heeded my recommendation , because he seemed to be deep in thought , no doubt trying to calculate how many one - fifths of a millimeter are found in forty square miles . as for me , i continued to observe this phenomenon . for several hours the nautilus 's spur sliced through these whitish waves , and i watched it glide noiselessly over this soapy water , as if it were cruising through those foaming eddies that a bay 's currents and countercurrents sometimes leave between each other .
chapter 2
a new proposition from captain nemo
on january 28 , in latitude 9 degrees 4 ' north , when the nautilus returned at noon to the surface of the sea , it lay in sight of land some eight miles to the west . right off , i observed a cluster of mountains about 2,000 feet high , whose shapes were very whimsically sculpted . after our position fix , i reentered the lounge , and when our bearings were reported on the chart , i saw that we were off the island of ceylon , that pearl dangling from the lower lobe of the indian peninsula .
i went looking in the library for a book about this island , one of the most fertile in the world . sure enough , i found a volume entitled ceylon and the singhalese by h. c. sirr , esq . reentering the lounge , i first noted the bearings of ceylon , on which antiquity lavished so many different names . it was located between latitude 5 degrees 55 ' and 9 degrees 49 ' north , and between longitude 79 degrees 42 ' and 82 degrees 4 ' east of the meridian of greenwich ; its length is 275 miles ; its maximum width , 150 miles ; its circumference , 900 miles ; its surface area , 24,448 square miles , in other words , a little smaller than that of ireland .
just then captain nemo and his chief officer appeared .
the captain glanced at the chart . then , turning to me :
" the island of ceylon , " he said , " is famous for its pearl fisheries . would you be interested , professor aronnax , in visiting one of those fisheries ? "
" certainly , captain . "
" fine . it 's easily done . only , when we see the fisheries , we 'll see no fishermen . the annual harvest has n't yet begun . no matter . i 'll give orders to make for the gulf of mannar , and we 'll arrive there late tonight . "
with the chart under my eyes , i looked for the gulf of mannar . i found it by the 9th parallel off the northwestern shores of ceylon . it was formed by the long curve of little mannar island . to reach it we had to go all the way up ceylon 's west coast .
" professor , " captain nemo then told me , " there are pearl fisheries in the bay of bengal , the seas of the east indies , the seas of china and japan , plus those seas south of the united states , the gulf of panama and the gulf of california ; but it 's off ceylon that such fishing reaps its richest rewards . no doubt we 'll be arriving a little early . fishermen gather in the gulf of mannar only during the month of march , and for thirty days some 300 boats concentrate on the lucrative harvest of these treasures from the sea . each boat is manned by ten oarsmen and ten fishermen . the latter divide into two groups , dive in rotation , and descend to a depth of twelve meters with the help of a heavy stone clutched between their feet and attached by a rope to their boat . "
" all , " captain nemo answered me , " although these fisheries belong to the most industrialized people in the world , the english , to whom the treaty of amiens granted them in 1802 . "
" yet it strikes me that diving suits like yours could perform yeoman service in such work . "
" yes , since those poor fishermen ca n't stay long underwater . on his voyage to ceylon , the englishman percival made much of a kaffir who stayed under five minutes without coming up to the surface , but i find that hard to believe . i know that some divers can last up to fifty - seven seconds , and highly skillful ones to eighty - seven ; but such men are rare , and when the poor fellows climb back on board , the water coming out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood . i believe the average time underwater that these fishermen can tolerate is thirty seconds , during which they hastily stuff their little nets with all the pearl oysters they can tear loose . but these fishermen generally do n't live to advanced age : their vision weakens , ulcers break out on their eyes , sores form on their bodies , and some are even stricken with apoplexy on the ocean floor . "
" yes , " i said , " it 's a sad occupation , and one that exists only to gratify the whims of fashion . but tell me , captain , how many oysters can a boat fish up in a workday ? "
" about 40,000 to 50,000 . it 's even said that in 1814 , when the english government went fishing on its own behalf , its divers worked just twenty days and brought up 76,000,000 oysters . "
" at least , " i asked , " the fishermen are well paid , are n't they ? "
" hardly , professor . in panama they make just $ 1.00 per week . in most places they earn only a penny for each oyster that has a pearl , and they bring up so many that have none ! "
" only one penny to those poor people who make their employers rich ! that 's atrocious ! "
" that suits me , captain . "
" by the way , professor aronnax , you are n't afraid of sharks , are you ? "
" sharks ? " i exclaimed .
this struck me as a pretty needless question , to say the least .
" well ? " captain nemo went on .
" i admit , captain , i 'm not yet on very familiar terms with that genus of fish . "
this said in a carefree tone , captain nemo left the lounge .
as for me , i passed a hand over my brow , where beads of cold sweat were busy forming .
and there i was , fantasizing about sharks , envisioning huge jaws armed with multiple rows of teeth and capable of cutting a man in half . i could already feel a definite pain around my pelvic girdle . and how i resented the offhand manner in which the captain had extended his deplorable invitation ! you would have thought it was an issue of going into the woods on some harmless fox hunt !
" thank heavens ! " i said to myself . " conseil will never want to come along , and that 'll be my excuse for not going with the captain . "
as for ned land , i admit i felt less confident of his wisdom . danger , however great , held a perennial attraction for his aggressive nature .
i went back to reading sirr 's book , but i leafed through it mechanically . between the lines i kept seeing fearsome , wide - open jaws .
just then conseil and the canadian entered with a calm , even gleeful air . little did they know what was waiting for them .
" ye gods , sir ! " ned land told me . " your captain nemo -- the devil take him -- has just made us a very pleasant proposition ! "
" oh ! " i said " you know about-- "
" with all due respect to master , " conseil replied , " the nautilus 's commander has invited us , together with master , for a visit tomorrow to ceylon 's magnificent pearl fisheries . he did so in the most cordial terms and conducted himself like a true gentleman . "
" he did n't tell you anything else ? "
" nothing , sir , " the canadian replied . " he said you 'd already discussed this little stroll . "
" indeed , " i said . " but did n't he give you any details on-- "
" not a one , mr . naturalist . you will be going with us , right ? "
" me ? why yes , certainly , of course ! i can see that you like the idea , mr . land . "
" yes ! it will be a really unusual experience ! "
" and possibly dangerous ! " i added in an insinuating tone .
" dangerous ? " ned land replied . " a simple trip to an oysterbank ? "
" would master , " conseil said to me , " give us some background on pearl fishing ? "
" on the fishing itself ? " i asked . " or on the occupational hazards that-- "
" on the fishing , " the canadian replied . " before we tackle the terrain , it helps to be familiar with it . "
" all right , sit down , my friends , and i 'll teach you everything i myself have just been taught by the englishman h. c. sirr ! "
ned and conseil took seats on a couch , and right off the canadian said to me :
" sir , just what is a pearl exactly ? "
" my gallant ned , " i replied , " for poets a pearl is a tear from the sea ; for orientals it 's a drop of solidified dew ; for the ladies it 's a jewel they can wear on their fingers , necks , and ears that 's oblong in shape , glassy in luster , and formed from mother - of - pearl ; for chemists it 's a mixture of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate with a little gelatin protein ; and finally , for naturalists it 's a simple festering secretion from the organ that produces mother - of - pearl in certain bivalves . "
" branch mollusca , " conseil said , " class acephala , order testacea . "
" correct , my scholarly conseil . now then , those testacea capable of producing pearls include rainbow abalone , turbo snails , giant clams , and saltwater scallops -- briefly , all those that secrete mother - of - pearl , in other words , that blue , azure , violet , or white substance lining the insides of their valves . "
" are mussels included too ? " the canadian asked .
" good ! " the canadian replied . " from now on we 'll pay closer attention to ' em . "
" can one find several pearls in the same oyster ? " conseil asked .
" yes , my boy . there are some shellfish that turn into real jewel coffers . they even mention one oyster , about which i remain dubious , that supposedly contained at least 150 sharks . "
" 150 sharks ! " ned land yelped .
" did i say sharks ? " i exclaimed hastily . " i meant 150 pearls . sharks would n't make sense . "
" indeed , " conseil said . " but will master now tell us how one goes about extracting these pearls ? "
" do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size ? " conseil asked .
" but it must be a long , hard job , sorting out these pearls by size , " the canadian said .
" no , my friend . that task is performed with eleven strainers , or sieves , that are pierced with different numbers of holes . those pearls staying in the strainers with twenty to eighty holes are in the first order . those not slipping through the sieves pierced with 100 to 800 holes are in the second order . finally , those pearls for which one uses strainers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make up the seed pearls . "
" how ingenious , " conseil said , " to reduce dividing and classifying pearls to a mechanical operation . and could master tell us the profits brought in by harvesting these banks of pearl oysters ? "
" according to sirr 's book , " i replied , " these ceylon fisheries are farmed annually for a total profit of 3,000,000 man - eaters . "
" francs ! " conseil rebuked .
" yes , francs ! 3,000,000 francs ! " i went on . " but i do n't think these fisheries bring in the returns they once did . similarly , the central american fisheries used to make an annual profit of 4,000,000 francs during the reign of king charles v , but now they bring in only two - thirds of that amount . all in all , it 's estimated that 9,000,000 francs is the current yearly return for the whole pearl - harvesting industry . "
" yes , my boy . they say julius caesar gave servilia a pearl worth 120,000 francs in our currency . "
" i 've even heard stories , " the canadian said , " about some lady in ancient times who drank pearls in vinegar . "
" cleopatra , " conseil shot back .
" it must have tasted pretty bad , " ned land added .
" abominable , ned my friend , " conseil replied . " but when a little glass of vinegar is worth 1,500,000 francs , its taste is a small price to pay . "
" i 'm sorry i did n't marry the gal , " the canadian said , throwing up his hands with an air of discouragement .
" ned land married to cleopatra ? " conseil exclaimed .
" my gallant ned , " i replied , laughing , " those were artificial pearls , ordinary glass beads whose insides were coated with essence of orient . "
" maybe that 's why kate tender married somebody else , " replied mr . land philosophically .
" but , " i said , " getting back to pearls of great value , i do n't think any sovereign ever possessed one superior to the pearl owned by captain nemo . "
" this one ? " conseil said , pointing to a magnificent jewel in its glass case .
" ha ! " ned land exclaimed . " during our stroll tomorrow , who says we wo n't run into one just like it ? "
" bah ! " conseil put in .
" and why not ? "
" what good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the nautilus ? "
" here , no , " ned land said . " but elsewhere . . . . "
" oh ! elsewhere ! " conseil put in , shaking his head .
" that 's how i see it , " the canadian said .
" but , " said conseil , who perpetually returned to the didactic side of things , " is this pearl fishing ever dangerous ? "
" no , " i replied quickly , " especially if one takes certain precautions . "
" what risks would you run in a job like that ? " ned land said . " swallowing a few gulps of salt water ? "
" whatever you say , ned . " then , trying to imitate captain nemo 's carefree tone , i asked , " by the way , gallant ned , are you afraid of sharks ? "
" me ? " the canadian replied . " i 'm a professional harpooner ! it 's my job to make a mockery of them ! "
" so it 's an issue of . . . ? "
" yes , precisely . "
" in the water ? "
" in the water . "
" ye gods , just give me a good harpoon ! you see , sir , these sharks are badly designed . they have to roll their bellies over to snap you up , and in the meantime . . . "
ned land had a way of pronouncing the word " snap " that sent chills down the spine .
" well , how about you , conseil ? what are your feelings about these man - eaters ? "
" me ? " conseil said . " i 'm afraid i must be frank with master . "
good for you , i thought .
" if master faces these sharks , " conseil said , " i think his loyal manservant should face them with him ! "
chapter 3
a pearl worth ten million
night fell . i went to bed . i slept pretty poorly . man - eaters played a major role in my dreams . and i found it more or less appropriate that the french word for shark , requin , has its linguistic roots in the word requiem .
the next day at four o'clock in the morning , i was awakened by the steward whom captain nemo had placed expressly at my service . i got up quickly , dressed , and went into the lounge . captain nemo was waiting for me .
" professor aronnax , " he said to me , " are you ready to start ? "
" i 'm ready . "
" kindly follow me . "
" what about my companions , captain ? "
" they 've been alerted and are waiting for us . "
" are n't we going to put on our diving suits ? " i asked .
captain nemo , conseil , ned land , and i found seats in the stern of the skiff . the longboat 's coxswain took the tiller ; his four companions leaned into their oars ; the moorings were cast off and we pulled clear .
we were silent . what was captain nemo thinking ? perhaps that this approaching shore was too close for comfort , contrary to the canadian 's views in which it still seemed too far away . as for conseil , he had come along out of simple curiosity .
near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined the upper lines of the coast with greater distinctness . fairly flat to the east , it swelled a little toward the south . five miles still separated it from us , and its beach merged with the misty waters . between us and the shore , the sea was deserted . not a boat , not a diver . profound solitude reigned over this gathering place of pearl fishermen . as captain nemo had commented , we were arriving in these waterways a month too soon .
at six o'clock the day broke suddenly , with that speed unique to tropical regions , which experience no real dawn or dusk . the sun 's rays pierced the cloud curtain gathered on the easterly horizon , and the radiant orb rose swiftly .
i could clearly see the shore , which featured a few sparse trees here and there .
the skiff advanced toward mannar island , which curved to the south . captain nemo stood up from his thwart and studied the sea .
i did n't reply , and while staring at these suspicious waves , i began to put on my heavy aquatic clothes , helped by the longboat 's sailors . captain nemo and my two companions suited up as well . none of the nautilus 's men were to go with us on this new excursion .
soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india - rubber clothing , and straps fastened the air devices onto our backs . as for the ruhmkorff device , it did n't seem to be in the picture . before inserting my head into its copper capsule , i commented on this to the captain .
" our lighting equipment would be useless to us , " the captain answered me . " we wo n't be going very deep , and the sun 's rays will be sufficient to light our way . besides , it 's unwise to carry electric lanterns under these waves . their brightness might unexpectedly attract certain dangerous occupants of these waterways . "
as captain nemo pronounced these words , i turned to conseil and ned land . but my two friends had already encased their craniums in their metal headgear , and they could neither hear nor reply .
i had one question left to address to captain nemo .
" what about our weapons ? " i asked him . " our rifles ? "
i stared at my companions . they were armed in the same fashion , and ned land was also brandishing an enormous harpoon he had stowed in the skiff before leaving the nautilus .
then , following the captain 's example , i let myself be crowned with my heavy copper sphere , and our air tanks immediately went into action .
an instant later , the longboat 's sailors helped us overboard one after the other , and we set foot on level sand in a meter and a half of water . captain nemo gave us a hand signal . we followed him down a gentle slope and disappeared under the waves .
there the obsessive fears in my brain left me . i became surprisingly calm again . the ease with which i could move increased my confidence , and the many strange sights captivated my imagination .
the sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves . the tiniest objects remained visible . after ten minutes of walking , we were in five meters of water , and the terrain had become almost flat .
near seven o'clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish , where pearl oysters reproduce by the millions . these valuable mollusks stick to rocks , where they 're strongly attached by a mass of brown filaments that forbids their moving about . in this respect oysters are inferior even to mussels , to whom nature has not denied all talent for locomotion .
the shellfish meleagrina , that womb for pearls whose valves are nearly equal in size , has the shape of a round shell with thick walls and a very rough exterior . some of these shells were furrowed with flaky , greenish bands that radiated down from the top . these were the young oysters . the others had rugged black surfaces , measured up to fifteen centimeters in width , and were ten or more years old .
captain nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish , and i saw that these mines were genuinely inexhaustible , since nature 's creative powers are greater than man 's destructive instincts . true to those instincts , ned land greedily stuffed the finest of these mollusks into a net he carried at his side .
but we could n't stop . we had to follow the captain , who headed down trails seemingly known only to himself . the seafloor rose noticeably , and when i lifted my arms , sometimes they would pass above the surface of the sea . then the level of the oysterbank would lower unpredictably . often we went around tall , pointed rocks rising like pyramids . in their dark crevices huge crustaceans , aiming their long legs like heavy artillery , watched us with unblinking eyes , while underfoot there crept millipedes , bloodworms , aricia worms , and annelid worms , whose antennas and tubular tentacles were incredibly long .
just then a huge cave opened up in our path , hollowed from a picturesque pile of rocks whose smooth heights were completely hung with underwater flora . at first this cave looked pitch - black to me . inside , the sun 's rays seemed to diminish by degrees . their hazy transparency was nothing more than drowned light .
captain nemo went in . we followed him . my eyes soon grew accustomed to this comparative gloom . i distinguished the unpredictably contoured springings of a vault , supported by natural pillars firmly based on a granite foundation , like the weighty columns of tuscan architecture . why had our incomprehensible guide taken us into the depths of this underwater crypt ? i would soon find out .
after going down a fairly steep slope , our feet trod the floor of a sort of circular pit . there captain nemo stopped , and his hand indicated an object that i had n't yet noticed . it was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions , a titanic giant clam , a holy - water font that could have held a whole lake , a basin more than two meters wide , hence even bigger than the one adorning the nautilus 's lounge .
i approached this phenomenal mollusk . its mass of filaments attached it to a table of granite , and there it grew by itself in the midst of the cave 's calm waters . i estimated the weight of this giant clam at 300 kilograms . hence such an oyster held fifteen kilos of meat , and you 'd need the stomach of king gargantua to eat a couple dozen .
the mollusk 's two valves were partly open . the captain approached and stuck his dagger vertically between the shells to discourage any ideas about closing ; then with his hands he raised the fringed , membrane - filled tunic that made up the animal 's mantle .
i then understood captain nemo 's intent . by leaving the pearl buried beneath the giant clam 's mantle , he allowed it to grow imperceptibly . with each passing year the mollusk 's secretions added new concentric layers . the captain alone was familiar with the cave where this wonderful fruit of nature was " ripening " ; he alone reared it , so to speak , in order to transfer it one day to his dearly beloved museum . perhaps , following the examples of oyster farmers in china and india , he had even predetermined the creation of this pearl by sticking under the mollusk 's folds some piece of glass or metal that was gradually covered with mother - of - pearl . in any case , comparing this pearl to others i already knew about , and to those shimmering in the captain 's collection , i estimated that it was worth at least 10,000,000 francs . it was a superb natural curiosity rather than a luxurious piece of jewelry , because i do n't know of any female ear that could handle it .
our visit to this opulent giant clam came to an end . captain nemo left the cave , and we climbed back up the bank of shellfish in the midst of these clear waters not yet disturbed by divers at work .
ten minutes later , captain nemo stopped suddenly . i thought he 'd called a halt so that we could turn and start back . no . with a gesture he ordered us to crouch beside him at the foot of a wide crevice . his hand motioned toward a spot within the liquid mass , and i looked carefully .
five meters away a shadow appeared and dropped to the seafloor . the alarming idea of sharks crossed my mind . but i was mistaken , and once again we did n't have to deal with monsters of the deep .
this diver did n't see us . a shadow cast by our crag hid us from his view . and besides , how could this poor indian ever have guessed that human beings , creatures like himself , were near him under the waters , eavesdropping on his movements , not missing a single detail of his fishing !
i observed him with great care . his movements were systematically executed , and for half an hour no danger seemed to threaten him . so i had gotten used to the sight of this fascinating fishing when all at once , just as the indian was kneeling on the seafloor , i saw him make a frightened gesture , stand , and gather himself to spring back to the surface of the waves . i understood his fear . a gigantic shadow appeared above the poor diver . it was a shark of huge size , moving in diagonally , eyes ablaze , jaws wide open !
i was speechless with horror , unable to make a single movement .
with one vigorous stroke of its fins , the voracious animal shot toward the indian , who jumped aside and avoided the shark 's bite but not the thrashing of its tail , because that tail struck him across the chest and stretched him out on the seafloor .
this scene lasted barely a few seconds . the shark returned , rolled over on its back , and was getting ready to cut the indian in half , when captain nemo , who was stationed beside me , suddenly stood up . then he strode right toward the monster , dagger in hand , ready to fight it at close quarters .
just as it was about to snap up the poor fisherman , the man - eater saw its new adversary , repositioned itself on its belly , and headed swiftly toward him .
i can see captain nemo 's bearing to this day . bracing himself , he waited for the fearsome man - eater with wonderful composure , and when the latter rushed at him , the captain leaped aside with prodigious quickness , avoided a collision , and sank his dagger into its belly . but that was n't the end of the story . a dreadful battle was joined .
the shark bellowed , so to speak . blood was pouring into the waves from its wounds . the sea was dyed red , and through this opaque liquid i could see nothing else .
i wanted to run to the captain 's rescue . but i was transfixed with horror , unable to move .
the waves were saturated with masses of blood . the waters shook with the movements of the man - eater , which thrashed about with indescribable fury . ned land had n't missed his target . this was the monster 's death rattle . pierced to the heart , it was struggling with dreadful spasms whose aftershocks knocked conseil off his feet .
meanwhile ned land pulled the captain clear . uninjured , the latter stood up , went right to the indian , quickly cut the rope binding the man to his stone , took the fellow in his arms , and with a vigorous kick of the heel , rose to the surface of the sea .
captain nemo 's first concern was to revive this unfortunate man . i was n't sure he would succeed . i hoped so , since the poor devil had n't been under very long . but that stroke from the shark 's tail could have been his deathblow .
fortunately , after vigorous massaging by conseil and the captain , i saw the nearly drowned man regain consciousness little by little . he opened his eyes . how startled he must have felt , how frightened even , at seeing four huge , copper craniums leaning over him !
at the captain 's signal we returned to the bank of shellfish , and retracing our steps , we walked for half an hour until we encountered the anchor connecting the seafloor with the nautilus 's skiff .
back on board , the sailors helped divest us of our heavy copper carapaces .
captain nemo 's first words were spoken to the canadian .
" thank you , mr . land , " he told him .
" tit for tat , captain , " ned land replied . " i owed it to you . "
the ghost of a smile glided across the captain 's lips , and that was all .
" to the nautilus , " he said .
the longboat flew over the waves . a few minutes later we encountered the shark 's corpse again , floating .
conseil looked at it with purely scientific fascination , and i 'm sure he placed it , not without good reason , in the class of cartilaginous fish , order chondropterygia with fixed gills , family selacia , genus squalus .
while i was contemplating this inert mass , suddenly a dozen of these voracious melanoptera appeared around our longboat ; but , paying no attention to us , they pounced on the corpse and quarreled over every scrap of it .
when i shared these impressions with him , he answered me in a tone touched with emotion :
" that indian , professor , lives in the land of the oppressed , and i am to this day , and will be until my last breath , a native of that same land ! "
chapter 4
the red sea
by then we had fared 16,220 miles , or 7,500 leagues , from our starting point in the seas of japan .
the next day , january 30 , when the nautilus rose to the surface of the ocean , there was no more land in sight . setting its course to the north - northwest , the ship headed toward the gulf of oman , carved out between arabia and the indian peninsula and providing access to the persian gulf .
" we 're going , mr . ned , where the captain 's fancy takes us . "
" his fancy , " the canadian replied , " wo n't take us very far . the persian gulf has no outlet , and if we enter those waters , it wo n't be long before we return in our tracks . "
" all right , we 'll return , mr . land , and after the persian gulf , if the nautilus wants to visit the red sea , the strait of bab el mandeb is still there to let us in ! "
" i do n't have to tell you , sir , " ned land replied , " that the red sea is just as landlocked as the gulf , since the isthmus of suez has n't been cut all the way through yet ; and even if it was , a boat as secretive as ours would n't risk a canal intersected with locks . so the red sea wo n't be our way back to europe either . "
" but i did n't say we 'd return to europe . "
" what do you figure , then ? "
" i figure that after visiting these unusual waterways of arabia and egypt , the nautilus will go back down to the indian ocean , perhaps through mozambique channel , perhaps off the mascarene islands , and then make for the cape of good hope . "
" and once we 're at the cape of good hope ? " the canadian asked with typical persistence .
" well then , we 'll enter that atlantic ocean with which we are n't yet familiar . what 's wrong , ned my friend ? are you tired of this voyage under the seas ? are you bored with the constantly changing sight of these underwater wonders ? speaking for myself , i 'll be extremely distressed to see the end of a voyage so few men will ever have a chance to make . "
" but do n't you realize , professor aronnax , " the canadian replied , " that soon we 'll have been imprisoned for three whole months aboard this nautilus ? "
" but when will it be over ? "
" in its appointed time . meanwhile there 's nothing we can do about it , and our discussions are futile . my gallant ned , if you come and tell me , ' a chance to escape is available to us , ' then i 'll discuss it with you . but that is n't the case , and in all honesty , i do n't think captain nemo ever ventures into european seas . "
this short dialogue reveals that in my mania for the nautilus , i was turning into the spitting image of its commander .
for four days until february 3 , the nautilus inspected the gulf of oman at various speeds and depths . it seemed to be traveling at random , as if hesitating over which course to follow , but it never crossed the tropic of cancer .
after leaving this gulf we raised muscat for an instant , the most important town in the country of oman . i marveled at its strange appearance in the midst of the black rocks surrounding it , against which the white of its houses and forts stood out sharply . i spotted the rounded domes of its mosques , the elegant tips of its minarets , and its fresh , leafy terraces . but it was only a fleeting vision , and the nautilus soon sank beneath the dark waves of these waterways .
on february 6 the nautilus cruised in sight of the city of aden , perched on a promontory connected to the continent by a narrow isthmus , a sort of inaccessible gibraltar whose fortifications the english rebuilt after capturing it in 1839 . i glimpsed the octagonal minarets of this town , which used to be one of the wealthiest , busiest commercial centers along this coast , as the arab historian idrisi tells it .
i was convinced that when captain nemo reached this point , he would back out again ; but i was mistaken , and much to my surprise , he did nothing of the sort .
the next day , february 7 , we entered the strait of bab el mandeb , whose name means " gate of tears " in the arabic language . twenty miles wide , it 's only fifty - two kilometers long , and with the nautilus launched at full speed , clearing it was the work of barely an hour . but i did n't see a thing , not even perim island where the british government built fortifications to strengthen aden 's position . there were many english and french steamers plowing this narrow passageway , liners going from suez to bombay , calcutta , melbourne , runion island , and mauritius ; far too much traffic for the nautilus to make an appearance on the surface . so it wisely stayed in midwater .
finally , at noon , we were plowing the waves of the red sea .
the red sea : that great lake so famous in biblical traditions , seldom replenished by rains , fed by no important rivers , continually drained by a high rate of evaporation , its water level dropping a meter and a half every year ! if it were fully landlocked like a lake , this odd gulf might dry up completely ; on this score it 's inferior to its neighbors , the caspian sea and the dead sea , whose levels lower only to the point where their evaporation exactly equals the amounts of water they take to their hearts .
this red sea is 2,600 kilometers long with an average width of 240 . in the days of the ptolemies and the roman emperors , it was a great commercial artery for the world , and when its isthmus has been cut through , it will completely regain that bygone importance that the suez railways have already brought back in part .
i would not even attempt to understand the whim that induced captain nemo to take us into this gulf . but i wholeheartedly approved of the nautilus 's entering it . it adopted a medium pace , sometimes staying on the surface , sometimes diving to avoid some ship , and so i could observe both the inside and topside of this highly unusual sea .
these polyparies were sticking to rocks , shells of mollusks , and even the stalks of water plants . they adorned the smallest crevices , some sprawling , others standing or hanging like coral outgrowths . i told conseil that sponges are fished up in two ways , either by dragnet or by hand . the latter method calls for the services of a diver , but it 's preferable because it spares the polypary 's tissue , leaving it with a much higher market value .
on february 9 the nautilus cruised in the widest part of the red sea , measuring 190 miles straight across from suakin on the west coast to qunfidha on the east coast .
" well , professor , are you pleased with this red sea ? have you seen enough of its hidden wonders , its fish and zoophytes , its gardens of sponges and forests of coral ? have you glimpsed the towns built on its shores ? "
" yes , captain nemo , " i replied , " and the nautilus is wonderfully suited to this whole survey . ah , it 's a clever boat ! "
" yes , sir , clever , daring , and invulnerable ! it fears neither the red sea 's dreadful storms nor its currents and reefs . "
" indeed , " i said , " this sea is mentioned as one of the worst , and in the days of the ancients , if i 'm not mistaken , it had an abominable reputation . "
" thoroughly abominable , professor aronnax . the greek and latin historians can find nothing to say in its favor , and the greek geographer strabo adds that it 's especially rough during the rainy season and the period of summer prevailing winds . the arab idrisi , referring to it by the name gulf of colzoum , relates that ships perished in large numbers on its sandbanks and that no one risked navigating it by night . this , he claims , is a sea subject to fearful hurricanes , strewn with inhospitable islands , and ' with nothing good to offer , ' either on its surface or in its depths . as a matter of fact , the same views can also be found in arrian , agatharchides , and artemidorus . "
" one can easily see , " i answered , " that those historians did n't navigate aboard the nautilus . "
" indeed , " the captain replied with a smile , " and in this respect , the moderns are n't much farther along than the ancients . it took many centuries to discover the mechanical power of steam ! who knows whether we 'll see a second nautilus within the next 100 years ! progress is slow , professor aronnax . "
" it 's true , " i replied . " your ship is a century ahead of its time , perhaps several centuries . it would be most unfortunate if such a secret were to die with its inventor ! "
captain nemo did not reply . after some minutes of silence :
" we were discussing , " he said , " the views of ancient historians on the dangers of navigating this red sea ? "
" true , " i replied . " but were n't their fears exaggerated ? "
" agreed , " i said . " and steam seems to have killed off all gratitude in seamen 's hearts . but since you seem to have made a special study of this sea , captain , can you tell me how it got its name ? "
" many explanations exist on the subject , professor aronnax . would you like to hear the views of one chronicler in the 14th century ? "
" gladly . "
" this fanciful fellow claims the sea was given its name after the crossing of the israelites , when the pharaoh perished in those waves that came together again at moses ' command :
" here they come . to my thinking , professor aronnax , this ' red sea ' designation must be regarded as a translation of the hebrew word ' edrom , ' and if the ancients gave it that name , it was because of the unique color of its waters . "
" until now , however , i 've seen only clear waves , without any unique hue . "
" surely , but as we move ahead to the far end of this gulf , you 'll note its odd appearance . i recall seeing the bay of el tur completely red , like a lake of blood . "
" and you attribute this color to the presence of microscopic algae ? "
" yes . it 's a purplish , mucilaginous substance produced by those tiny buds known by the name trichodesmia , 40,000 of which are needed to occupy the space of one square millimeter . perhaps you 'll encounter them when we reach el tur . "
" hence , captain nemo , this is n't the first time you 've gone through the red sea aboard the nautilus ? "
" no , sir . "
" then , since you 've already mentioned the crossing of the israelites and the catastrophe that befell the egyptians , i would ask if you 've ever discovered any traces under the waters of that great historic event ? "
" no , professor , and for an excellent reason . "
" what 's that ? "
" it 's because that same locality where moses crossed with all his people is now so clogged with sand , camels can barely get their legs wet . you can understand that my nautilus would n't have enough water for itself . "
" and that locality is . . . ? " i asked .
" that locality lies a little above suez in a sound that used to form a deep estuary when the red sea stretched as far as the bitter lakes . now , whether or not their crossing was literally miraculous , the israelites did cross there in returning to the promised land , and the pharaoh 's army did perish at precisely that locality . so i think that excavating those sands would bring to light a great many weapons and tools of egyptian origin . "
" well , captain , what the ancients hesitated to undertake , mr . de lesseps is now finishing up ; his joining of these two seas will shorten the route from cadiz to the east indies by 9,000 kilometers , and he 'll soon change africa into an immense island . "
" yes , professor aronnax , and you have every right to be proud of your fellow countryman . such a man brings a nation more honor than the greatest commanders ! like so many others , he began with difficulties and setbacks , but he triumphed because he has the volunteer spirit . and it 's sad to think that this deed , which should have been an international deed , which would have insured that any administration went down in history , will succeed only through the efforts of one man . so all hail to mr . de lesseps ! "
" yes , all hail to that great french citizen , " i replied , quite startled by how emphatically captain nemo had just spoken .
" unfortunately , " he went on , " i ca n't take you through that suez canal , but the day after tomorrow , you 'll be able to see the long jetties of port said when we 're in the mediterranean . "
" in the mediterranean ! " i exclaimed .
" yes , professor . does that amaze you ? "
" what amazes me is thinking we 'll be there the day after tomorrow . "
" oh really ? "
" yes , captain , although since i 've been aboard your vessel , i should have formed the habit of not being amazed by anything ! "
" but what is it that startles you ? "
" the thought of how hideously fast the nautilus will need to go , if it 's to double the cape of good hope , circle around africa , and lie in the open mediterranean by the day after tomorrow . "
" and who says it will circle africa , professor ? what 's this talk about doubling the cape of good hope ? "
" but unless the nautilus navigates on dry land and crosses over the isthmus-- "
" or under it , professor aronnax . "
" under it ? "
" surely , " captain nemo replied serenely . " under that tongue of land , nature long ago made what man today is making on its surface . "
" what ! there 's a passageway ? "
" but is n't that isthmus only composed of quicksand ? "
" to a certain depth . but at merely fifty meters , one encounters a firm foundation of rock . "
" and it 's by luck that you discovered this passageway ? " i asked , more and more startled .
" luck plus logic , professor , and logic even more than luck . "
" captain , i hear you , but i ca n't believe my ears . "
" is it indiscreet to ask how you discovered this tunnel ? "
" sir , " the captain answered me , " there can be no secrets between men who will never leave each other . "
i ignored this innuendo and waited for captain nemo 's explanation .
chapter 5 arabian tunnel
the same day , i reported to conseil and ned land that part of the foregoing conversation directly concerning them . when i told them we would be lying in mediterranean waters within two days , conseil clapped his hands , but the canadian shrugged his shoulders .
" an underwater tunnel ! " he exclaimed . " a connection between two seas ! who ever heard of such malarkey ! "
" ned my friend , " conseil replied , " had you ever heard of the nautilus ? no , yet here it is ! so do n't shrug your shoulders so blithely , and do n't discount something with the feeble excuse that you 've never heard of it . "
" we 'll soon see ! " ned land shot back , shaking his head . " after all , i 'd like nothing better than to believe in your captain 's little passageway , and may heaven grant it really does take us to the mediterranean . "
soon jidda faded into the shadows of evening , and the nautilus went back beneath the mildly phosphorescent waters .
the next day , february 10 , several ships appeared , running on our opposite tack . the nautilus resumed its underwater navigating ; but at the moment of our noon sights , the sea was deserted and the ship rose again to its waterline .
with ned and conseil , i went to sit on the platform . the coast to the east looked like a slightly blurred mass in a damp fog .
leaning against the sides of the skiff , we were chatting of one thing and another , when ned land stretched his hand toward a point in the water , saying to me :
" see anything out there , professor ? "
" no , ned , " i replied , " but you know i do n't have your eyes . "
" right , " i said after observing carefully , " i can make out something like a long , blackish object on the surface of the water . "
" a second nautilus ? " conseil said .
" no , " the canadian replied , " unless i 'm badly mistaken , that 's some marine animal . "
" are there whales in the red sea ? " conseil asked .
" yes , my boy , " i replied , " they 're sometimes found here . "
" that 's no whale , " continued ned land , whose eyes never strayed from the object they had sighted . " we 're old chums , whales and i , and i could n't mistake their little ways . "
" let 's wait and see , " conseil said . " the nautilus is heading that direction , and we 'll soon know what we 're in for . "
" oh , it 's moving off ! it 's diving ! " ned land exclaimed . " damnation ! what can that animal be ? it does n't have a forked tail like baleen whales or sperm whales , and its fins look like sawed - off limbs . "
" but in that case-- " i put in .
" good lord , " the canadian went on , " it 's rolled over on its back , and it 's raising its breasts in the air ! "
" it 's a siren ! " conseil exclaimed . " with all due respect to master , it 's an actual mermaid ! "
that word " siren " put me back on track , and i realized that the animal belonged to the order sirenia : marine creatures that legends have turned into mermaids , half woman , half fish .
" no , " i told conseil , " that 's no mermaid , it 's an unusual creature of which only a few specimens are left in the red sea . that 's a dugong . "
and when conseil has spoken , there 's nothing else to be said .
" oh , sir , " he told me in a voice trembling with excitement , " i 've never killed anything like that ! "
his whole being was concentrated in this last word .
just then captain nemo appeared on the platform . he spotted the dugong . he understood the canadian 's frame of mind and addressed him directly :
" if you held a harpoon , mr . land , would n't your hands be itching to put it to work ? "
" positively , sir . "
" and just for one day , would it displease you to return to your fisherman 's trade and add this cetacean to the list of those you 've already hunted down ? "
" it would n't displease me one bit . "
" all right , you can try your luck ! "
" thank you , sir , " ned land replied , his eyes ablaze .
" only , " the captain went on , " i urge you to aim carefully at this animal , in your own personal interest . "
" is the dugong dangerous to attack ? " i asked , despite the canadian 's shrug of the shoulders .
" yes , sometimes , " the captain replied . " these animals have been known to turn on their assailants and capsize their longboats . but with mr . land that danger is n't to be feared . his eye is sharp , his arm is sure . if i recommend that he aim carefully at this dugong , it 's because the animal is justly regarded as fine game , and i know mr . land does n't despise a choice morsel . "
" aha ! " the canadian put in . " this beast offers the added luxury of being good to eat ? "
" maybe , " the canadian answered , " it would be better to hunt it down , in the interests of mealtime . "
" then proceed , mr . land , " captain nemo replied .
" are n't you coming , captain ? " i asked .
" no , sir , but i wish you happy hunting . "
the skiff pulled clear , and carried off by its six oars , it headed swiftly toward the dugong , which by then was floating two miles from the nautilus .
arriving within a few cable lengths of the cetacean , our longboat slowed down , and the sculls dipped noiselessly into the tranquil waters . harpoon in hand , ned land went to take his stand in the skiff 's bow . harpoons used for hunting whales are usually attached to a very long rope that pays out quickly when the wounded animal drags it with him . but this rope measured no more than about ten fathoms , and its end had simply been fastened to a small barrel that , while floating , would indicate the dugong 's movements beneath the waters .
suddenly a hissing sound was audible , and the dugong disappeared . although the harpoon had been forcefully hurled , it apparently had hit only water .
" damnation ! " exclaimed the furious canadian . " i missed it ! "
" no , " i said , " the animal 's wounded , there 's its blood ; but your weapon did n't stick in its body . "
" my harpoon ! get my harpoon ! " ned land exclaimed .
we chased it unflaggingly for a full hour , and i 'd begun to think it would prove too difficult to capture , when the animal got the untimely idea of taking revenge on us , a notion it would soon have cause to regret . it wheeled on the skiff , to assault us in its turn .
this maneuver did not escape the canadian .
" watch out ! " he said .
the coxswain pronounced a few words in his bizarre language , and no doubt he alerted his men to keep on their guard .
arriving within twenty feet of the skiff , the dugong stopped , sharply sniffing the air with its huge nostrils , pierced not at the tip of its muzzle but on its topside . then it gathered itself and sprang at us .
i heard its teeth grind on sheet iron , and the dugong disappeared , taking our harpoon along with it . but the barrel soon popped up on the surface , and a few moments later the animal 's body appeared and rolled over on its back . our skiff rejoined it , took it in tow , and headed to the nautilus .
it took pulleys of great strength to hoist this dugong onto the platform . the beast weighed 5,000 kilograms . it was carved up in sight of the canadian , who remained to watch every detail of the operation . at dinner the same day , my steward served me some slices of this flesh , skillfully dressed by the ship 's cook . i found it excellent , even better than veal if not beef .
by then the nautilus had reduced speed . it moved ahead at a saunter , so to speak . i observed that the red sea 's water was becoming less salty the closer we got to suez .
near five o'clock in the afternoon , we sighted cape ras mohammed to the north . this cape forms the tip of arabia petraea , which lies between the gulf of suez and the gulf of aqaba .
at six o'clock , sometimes afloat and sometimes submerged , the nautilus passed well out from el tur , which sat at the far end of a bay whose waters seemed to be dyed red , as captain nemo had already mentioned . then night fell in the midst of a heavy silence occasionally broken by the calls of pelicans and nocturnal birds , by the sound of surf chafing against rocks , or by the distant moan of a steamer churning the waves of the gulf with noisy blades .
from eight to nine o'clock , the nautilus stayed a few meters beneath the waters . according to my calculations , we had to be quite close to suez . through the panels in the lounge , i spotted rocky bottoms brightly lit by our electric rays . it seemed to me that the strait was getting narrower and narrower .
soon , in the shadows , i spotted a pale signal light glimmering a mile away , half discolored by mist .
" a floating lighthouse , " said someone next to me .
i turned and discovered the captain .
" it ca n't be very easy to enter it . "
" no , sir . accordingly , i 'm in the habit of staying in the pilothouse and directing maneuvers myself . and now if you 'll kindly go below , professor aronnax , the nautilus is about to sink beneath the waves , and it will only return to the surface after we 've cleared the arabian tunnel . "
i followed captain nemo . the hatch closed , the ballast tanks filled with water , and the submersible sank some ten meters down .
just as i was about to repair to my stateroom , the captain stopped me .
" professor , " he said to me , " would you like to go with me to the wheelhouse ? "
" i was afraid to ask , " i replied .
" come along , then . this way , you 'll learn the full story about this combination underwater and underground navigating . "
captain nemo led me to the central companionway . in midstair he opened a door , went along the upper gangways , and arrived at the wheelhouse , which , as you know , stands at one end of the platform .
it was a cabin measuring six feet square and closely resembling those occupied by the helmsmen of steamboats on the mississippi or hudson rivers . in the center stood an upright wheel geared to rudder cables running to the nautilus 's stern . set in the cabin 's walls were four deadlights , windows of biconvex glass that enabled the man at the helm to see in every direction .
the cabin was dark ; but my eyes soon grew accustomed to its darkness and i saw the pilot , a muscular man whose hands rested on the pegs of the wheel . outside , the sea was brightly lit by the beacon shining behind the cabin at the other end of the platform .
" now , " captain nemo said , " let 's look for our passageway . "
standing by the port deadlight , i spotted magnificent coral substructures , zoophytes , algae , and crustaceans with enormous quivering claws that stretched forth from crevices in the rock .
at 10:15 captain nemo himself took the helm . dark and deep , a wide gallery opened ahead of us . the nautilus was brazenly swallowed up . strange rumblings were audible along our sides . it was the water of the red sea , hurled toward the mediterranean by the tunnel 's slope . our engines tried to offer resistance by churning the waves with propeller in reverse , but the nautilus went with the torrent , as swift as an arrow .
along the narrow walls of this passageway , i saw only brilliant streaks , hard lines , fiery furrows , all scrawled by our speeding electric light . with my hand i tried to curb the pounding of my heart .
at 10:35 captain nemo left the steering wheel and turned to me :
" the mediterranean , " he told me .
in less than twenty minutes , swept along by the torrent , the nautilus had just cleared the isthmus of suez .
chapter 6
the greek islands
at sunrise the next morning , february 12 , the nautilus rose to the surface of the waves . i rushed onto the platform . the hazy silhouette of pelusium was outlined three miles to the south . a torrent had carried us from one sea to the other . but although that tunnel was easy to descend , going back up must have been impossible .
" well , mr . naturalist , " the canadian asked in a gently mocking tone , " and how about that mediterranean ? "
" we 're floating on its surface , ned my friend . "
" what ! " conseil put in . " last night . . . ? "
" yes , last night , in a matter of minutes , we cleared that insuperable isthmus . "
" i do n't believe a word of it , " the canadian replied .
" and you 're in the wrong , mr . land , " i went on . " that flat coastline curving southward is the coast of egypt . "
" tell it to the marines , sir , " answered the stubborn canadian .
" but if master says so , " conseil told him , " then so be it . "
" what 's more , ned , " i said , " captain nemo himself did the honors in his tunnel , and i stood beside him in the pilothouse while he steered the nautilus through that narrow passageway . "
" you hear , ned ? " conseil said .
" and you , ned , who have such good eyes , " i added , " you can spot the jetties of port said stretching out to sea . "
the canadian looked carefully .
" correct , " he said . " you 're right , professor , and your captain 's a superman . we 're in the mediterranean . fine . so now let 's have a chat about our little doings , if you please , but in such a way that nobody overhears . "
" now , ned , we 're all ears , " i said . " what have you to tell us ? "
" what i 've got to tell you is very simple , " the canadian replied . " we 're in europe , and before captain nemo 's whims take us deep into the polar seas or back to oceania , i say we should leave this nautilus . "
i confess that such discussions with the canadian always baffled me . i did n't want to restrict my companions ' freedom in any way , and yet i had no desire to leave captain nemo . thanks to him and his submersible , i was finishing my undersea research by the day , and i was rewriting my book on the great ocean depths in the midst of its very element . would i ever again have such an opportunity to observe the ocean 's wonders ? absolutely not ! so i could n't entertain this idea of leaving the nautilus before completing our course of inquiry .
" ned my friend , " i said , " answer me honestly . are you bored with this ship ? are you sorry that fate has cast you into captain nemo 's hands ? "
the canadian paused for a short while before replying . then , crossing his arms :
" honestly , " he said , " i 'm not sorry about this voyage under the seas . i 'll be glad to have done it , but in order to have done it , it has to finish . that 's my feeling . "
" it will finish , ned . "
" where and when ? "
" where ? i do n't know . when ? i ca n't say . or , rather , i suppose it will be over when these seas have nothing more to teach us . everything that begins in this world must inevitably come to an end . "
" i think as master does , " conseil replied , " and it 's extremely possible that after crossing every sea on the globe , captain nemo will bid the three of us a fond farewell . "
" bid us a fond farewell ? " the canadian exclaimed . " you mean beat us to a fare - thee - well ! "
" but in that case what do you expect ? " the canadian asked .
" that we 'll encounter advantageous conditions for escaping just as readily in six months as now . "
" great scott ! " ned land put in . " and where , if you please , will we be in six months , mr . naturalist ? "
" perhaps here , perhaps in china . you know how quickly the nautilus moves . it crosses oceans like swallows cross the air or express trains continents . it does n't fear heavily traveled seas . who can say it wo n't hug the coasts of france , england , or america , where an escape attempt could be carried out just as effectively as here . "
i was hard pressed by ned land 's common sense , and i felt myself losing ground . i no longer knew what arguments to put forward on my behalf .
" sir , " ned went on , " let 's suppose that by some impossibility , captain nemo offered your freedom to you this very day . would you accept ? "
" i do n't know , " i replied .
" and suppose he adds that this offer he 's making you today wo n't ever be repeated , then would you accept ? "
i did not reply .
" and what thinks our friend conseil ? " ned land asked .
" your friend conseil , " the fine lad replied serenely , " has nothing to say for himself . he 's a completely disinterested party on this question . like his master , like his comrade ned , he 's a bachelor . neither wife , parents , nor children are waiting for him back home . he 's in master 's employ , he thinks like master , he speaks like master , and much to his regret , he ca n't be counted on to form a majority . only two persons face each other here : master on one side , ned land on the other . that said , your friend conseil is listening , and he 's ready to keep score . "
i could n't help smiling as conseil wiped himself out of existence . deep down , the canadian must have been overjoyed at not having to contend with him .
" then , sir , " ned land said , " since conseil is no more , we 'll have this discussion between just the two of us . i 've talked , you 've listened . what 's your reply ? "
it was obvious that the matter had to be settled , and evasions were distasteful to me .
" fine , professor aronnax , that 's wisely said . "
" but one proviso , " i said , " just one . the opportunity must be the real thing . our first attempt to escape must succeed , because if it misfires , we wo n't get a second chance , and captain nemo will never forgive us . "
" that 's also well put , " the canadian replied . " but your proviso applies to any escape attempt , whether it happens in two years or two days . so this is still the question : if a promising opportunity comes up , we have to grab it . "
" agreed . and now , ned , will you tell me what you mean by a promising opportunity ? "
" one that leads the nautilus on a cloudy night within a short distance of some european coast . "
" and you 'll try to get away by swimming ? "
" yes , if we 're close enough to shore and the ship 's afloat on the surface . no , if we 're well out and the ship 's navigating under the waters . "
" and in that event ? "
" fine , ned . stay on the lookout for such an opportunity , but do n't forget , one slipup will finish us . "
" i wo n't forget , sir . "
" and now , ned , would you like to know my overall thinking on your plan ? "
" gladly , professor aronnax . "
" well then , i think -- and i do n't mean ' i hope'--that your promising opportunity wo n't ever arise . "
" why not ? "
" because captain nemo recognizes that we have n't given up all hope of recovering our freedom , and he 'll keep on his guard , above all in seas within sight of the coasts of europe . "
" i 'm of master 's opinion , " conseil said .
" we 'll soon see , " ned land replied , shaking his head with a determined expression .
" and now , ned land , " i added , " let 's leave it at that . not another word on any of this . the day you 're ready , alert us and we 're with you . i turn it all over to you . "
that 's how we ended this conversation , which later was to have such serious consequences . at first , i must say , events seemed to confirm my forecasts , much to the canadian 's despair . did captain nemo view us with distrust in these heavily traveled seas , or did he simply want to hide from the sight of those ships of every nation that plowed the mediterranean ? i have no idea , but usually he stayed in midwater and well out from any coast . either the nautilus surfaced only enough to let its pilothouse emerge , or it slipped away to the lower depths , although , between the greek islands and asia minor , we did n't find bottom even at 2,000 meters down .
accordingly , i became aware of the isle of karpathos , one of the sporades islands , only when captain nemo placed his finger over a spot on the world map and quoted me this verse from virgil :
est in carpathio neptuni gurgite vates caeruleus proteus . . . * it was indeed that bygone abode of proteus , the old shepherd of king neptune 's flocks : an island located between rhodes and crete , which greeks now call karpathos , italians scarpanto . through the lounge window i could see only its granite bedrock .
so i did n't allude to this event when , that evening , i chanced to be alone with the captain in the lounge . besides , he seemed silent and preoccupied . then , contrary to custom , he ordered that both panels in the lounge be opened , and going from the one to the other , he carefully observed the watery mass . for what purpose ? i had n't a guess , and for my part , i spent my time studying the fish that passed before my eyes .
among others i noted that sand goby mentioned by aristotle and commonly known by the name sea loach , which is encountered exclusively in the salty waters next to the nile delta . near them some semiphosphorescent red porgy rolled by , a variety of gilthead that the egyptians ranked among their sacred animals , lauding them in religious ceremonies when their arrival in the river 's waters announced the fertile flood season . i also noticed some wrasse known as the tapiro , three decimeters long , bony fish with transparent scales whose bluish gray color is mixed with red spots ; they 're enthusiastic eaters of marine vegetables , which gives them an exquisite flavor ; hence these tapiro were much in demand by the epicures of ancient rome , and their entrails were dressed with brains of peacock , tongue of flamingo , and testes of moray to make that divine platter that so enraptured the roman emperor vitellius .
i turned to captain nemo , and in an agitated voice :
" a man ! a castaway ! " i exclaimed . " we must rescue him at all cost ! "
the captain did n't reply but went to lean against the window .
the man drew near , and gluing his face to the panel , he stared at us .
to my deep astonishment , captain nemo gave him a signal . the diver answered with his hand , immediately swam up to the surface of the sea , and did n't reappear .
" do n't be alarmed , " the captain told me . " that 's nicolas from cape matapan , nicknamed ' il pesce . ' he 's well known throughout the cyclades islands . a bold diver ! water is his true element , and he lives in the sea more than on shore , going constantly from one island to another , even to crete . "
" you know him , captain ? "
" why not , professor aronnax ? "
this said , captain nemo went to a cabinet standing near the lounge 's left panel . next to this cabinet i saw a chest bound with hoops of iron , its lid bearing a copper plaque that displayed the nautilus 's monogram with its motto mobilis in mobili .
just then , ignoring my presence , the captain opened this cabinet , a sort of safe that contained a large number of ingots .
i did n't pronounce a word . i gaped . captain nemo took out the ingots one by one and arranged them methodically inside the chest , filling it to the top . at which point i estimate that it held more than 1,000 kilograms of gold , in other words , close to 5,000,000 francs .
after securely fastening the chest , captain nemo wrote an address on its lid in characters that must have been modern greek .
just then captain nemo turned to me :
" you were saying , professor ? " he asked me .
" i was n't saying a thing , captain . "
then i heard the sound of footsteps on the platform . i realized that the skiff was being detached and launched to sea . for an instant it bumped the nautilus 's side , then all sounds ceased .
two hours later , the same noises , the same comings and goings , were repeated . hoisted on board , the longboat was readjusted into its socket , and the nautilus plunged back beneath the waves .
so those millions had been delivered to their address . at what spot on the continent ? who was the recipient of captain nemo 's gold ?
the next day i related the night 's events to conseil and the canadian , events that had aroused my curiosity to a fever pitch . my companions were as startled as i was .
" but where does he get those millions ? " ned land asked .
i kept on working , but the temperature rose to the point of becoming unbearable .
" could there be a fire on board ? " i wondered .
i was about to leave the lounge when captain nemo entered . he approached the thermometer , consulted it , and turned to me :
" 42 degrees centigrade , " he said .
" oh , professor , it wo n't get any hotter unless we want it to ! "
" you mean you can control this heat ? "
" no , but i can back away from the fireplace producing it . "
" so it 's outside ? "
" surely . we 're cruising in a current of boiling water . "
" it ca n't be ! " i exclaimed .
" look . "
the panels had opened , and i could see a completely white sea around the nautilus . steaming sulfurous fumes uncoiled in the midst of waves bubbling like water in a boiler . i leaned my hand against one of the windows , but the heat was so great , i had to snatch it back .
" where are we ? " i asked .
" near the island of santorini , professor , " the captain answered me , " and right in the channel that separates the volcanic islets of nea kameni and palea kameni . i wanted to offer you the unusual sight of an underwater eruption . "
" i thought , " i said , " that the formation of such new islands had come to an end . "
" what about this channel we 're in right now ? " i asked .
" here it is , " captain nemo replied , showing me a chart of the greek islands . " you observe that i 've entered the new islets in their place . "
" but will this channel fill up one day ? "
" very likely , professor aronnax , because since 1866 eight little lava islets have surged up in front of the port of st . nicolas on palea kameni . so it 's obvious that nea and palea will join in days to come . in the middle of the pacific , tiny infusoria build continents , but here they 're built by volcanic phenomena . look , sir ! look at the construction work going on under these waves . "
" we ca n't stay any longer in this boiling water , " i told the captain .
" no , it would n't be advisable , " replied nemo the emotionless .
he gave an order . the nautilus tacked about and retreated from this furnace it could n't brave with impunity . a quarter of an hour later , we were breathing fresh air on the surface of the waves .
it then occurred to me that if ned had chosen these waterways for our escape attempt , we would n't have come out alive from this sea of fire .
the next day , february 16 , we left this basin , which tallies depths of 3,000 meters between rhodes and alexandria , and passing well out from cerigo island after doubling cape matapan , the nautilus left the greek islands behind .
chapter 7
the mediterranean in forty - eight hours
it was obvious to me that this mediterranean , pinned in the middle of those shores he wanted to avoid , gave captain nemo no pleasure . its waves and breezes brought back too many memories , if not too many regrets . here he no longer had the ease of movement and freedom of maneuver that the oceans allowed him , and his nautilus felt cramped so close to the coasts of both africa and europe .
among the various fish inhabiting it , some i viewed , others i glimpsed , and the rest i missed completely because of the nautilus 's speed . kindly allow me to sort them out using this whimsical system of classification . it will at least convey the quickness of my observations .
as for marine mammals , on passing by the mouth of the adriatic sea , i thought i recognized two or three sperm whales equipped with the single dorsal fin denoting the genus physeter , some pilot whales from the genus globicephalus exclusive to the mediterranean , the forepart of the head striped with small distinct lines , and also a dozen seals with white bellies and black coats , known by the name monk seals and just as solemn as if they were three - meter dominicans .
for his part , conseil thought he spotted a turtle six feet wide and adorned with three protruding ridges that ran lengthwise . i was sorry to miss this reptile , because from conseil 's description , i believe i recognized the leatherback turtle , a pretty rare species . for my part , i noted only some loggerhead turtles with long carapaces .
by then we were passing between sicily and the coast of tunisia . in the cramped space between cape bon and the strait of messina , the sea bottom rises almost all at once . it forms an actual ridge with only seventeen meters of water remaining above it , while the depth on either side is 170 meters . consequently , the nautilus had to maneuver with caution so as not to bump into this underwater barrier .
i showed conseil the position of this long reef on our chart of the mediterranean .
" but with all due respect to master , " conseil ventured to observe , " it 's like an actual isthmus connecting europe to africa . "
" yes , my boy , " i replied , " it cuts across the whole strait of sicily , and smith 's soundings prove that in the past , these two continents were genuinely connected between cape boeo and cape farina . "
" i can easily believe it , " conseil said .
" i might add , " i went on , " that there 's a similar barrier between gibraltar and ceuta , and in prehistoric times it closed off the mediterranean completely . "
" gracious ! " conseil put in . " suppose one day some volcanic upheaval raises these two barriers back above the waves ! "
" that 's most unlikely , conseil . "
" if master will allow me to finish , i mean that if this phenomenon occurs , it might prove distressing to mr . de lesseps , who has gone to such pains to cut through his isthmus ! "
" agreed , but i repeat , conseil : such a phenomenon wo n't occur . the intensity of these underground forces continues to diminish . volcanoes were quite numerous in the world 's early days , but they 're going extinct one by one ; the heat inside the earth is growing weaker , the temperature in the globe 's lower strata is cooling appreciably every century , and to our globe 's detriment , because its heat is its life . "
" but the sun-- "
" the sun is n't enough , conseil . can it restore heat to a corpse ? "
" not that i 've heard . "
" well , my friend , someday the earth will be just such a cold corpse . like the moon , which long ago lost its vital heat , our globe will become lifeless and unlivable . "
" in how many centuries ? " conseil asked .
" in hundreds of thousands of years , my boy . "
" then we have ample time to finish our voyage , " conseil replied , " if ned land does n't mess things up ! "
thus reassured , conseil went back to studying the shallows that the nautilus was skimming at moderate speed .
conseil kept especially busy observing mollusks and articulates , and although his catalog is a little dry , i would n't want to wrong the gallant lad by leaving out his personal observations .
as for the articulates , in his notes conseil has very appropriately divided them into six classes , three of which belong to the marine world . these classes are the crustacea , cirripedia , and annelida .
there conseil 's work came to a halt . he did n't have time to finish off the class crustacea through an examination of its stomatopods , amphipods , homopods , isopods , trilobites , branchiopods , ostracods , and entomostraceans . and in order to complete his study of marine articulates , he needed to mention the class cirripedia , which contains water fleas and carp lice , plus the class annelida , which he would have divided without fail into tubifex worms and dorsibranchian worms . but having gone past the shallows of the strait of sicily , the nautilus resumed its usual deep - water speed . from then on , no more mollusks , no more zoophytes , no more articulates . just a few large fish sweeping by like shadows .
there , in place of natural wonders , the watery mass offered some thrilling and dreadful scenes to my eyes . in essence , we were then crossing that part of the whole mediterranean so fertile in casualties . from the coast of algiers to the beaches of provence , how many ships have wrecked , how many vessels have vanished ! compared to the vast liquid plains of the pacific , the mediterranean is a mere lake , but it 's an unpredictable lake with fickle waves , today kindly and affectionate to those frail single - masters drifting between a double ultramarine of sky and water , tomorrow bad - tempered and turbulent , agitated by the winds , demolishing the strongest ships beneath sudden waves that smash down with a headlong wallop .
some of these wrecked ships had perished in collisions , others from hitting granite reefs . i saw a few that had sunk straight down , their masting still upright , their rigging stiffened by the water . they looked like they were at anchor by some immense , open , offshore mooring where they were waiting for their departure time . when the nautilus passed between them , covering them with sheets of electricity , they seemed ready to salute us with their colors and send us their serial numbers ! but no , nothing but silence and death filled this field of catastrophes !
meanwhile , briskly unconcerned , the nautilus ran at full propeller through the midst of these ruins . on february 18 , near three o'clock in the morning , it hove before the entrance to the strait of gibraltar .
there are two currents here : an upper current , long known to exist , that carries the ocean 's waters into the mediterranean basin ; then a lower countercurrent , the only present - day proof of its existence being logic . in essence , the mediterranean receives a continual influx of water not only from the atlantic but from rivers emptying into it ; since local evaporation is n't enough to restore the balance , the total amount of added water should make this sea 's level higher every year . yet this is n't the case , and we 're naturally forced to believe in the existence of some lower current that carries the mediterranean 's surplus through the strait of gibraltar and into the atlantic basin .
chapter 8
the bay of vigo
the nautilus broke these waters with the edge of its spur after doing nearly 10,000 leagues in three and a half months , a track longer than a great circle of the earth . where were we heading now , and what did the future have in store for us ?
emerging from the strait of gibraltar , the nautilus took to the high seas . it returned to the surface of the waves , so our daily strolls on the platform were restored to us .
i repaired to my stateroom . conseil returned to his cabin ; but the canadian , looking rather worried , followed me . our quick trip through the mediterranean had n't allowed him to put his plans into execution , and he could barely conceal his disappointment .
after the door to my stateroom was closed , he sat and stared at me silently .
ned land did n't reply . his pursed lips and frowning brow indicated that he was in the grip of his monomania .
ned land stared at me still more intently and finally unpursed his lips :
" we 'll do it this evening , " he said .
i straightened suddenly . i admit that i was less than ready for this announcement . i wanted to reply to the canadian , but words failed me .
since i did n't say anything , the canadian stood up and approached me :
" we 'll do it this evening at nine o'clock , " he said . " i 've alerted conseil . by that time captain nemo will be locked in his room and probably in bed . neither the mechanics or the crewmen will be able to see us . conseil and i will go to the central companionway . as for you , professor aronnax , you 'll stay in the library two steps away and wait for my signal . the oars , mast , and sail are in the skiff . i 've even managed to stow some provisions inside . i 've gotten hold of a monkey wrench to unscrew the nuts bolting the skiff to the nautilus 's hull . so everything 's ready . i 'll see you this evening . "
" the sea is rough , " i said .
" admitted , " the canadian replied , " but we 've got to risk it . freedom is worth paying for . besides , the longboat 's solidly built , and a few miles with the wind behind us is no big deal . by tomorrow , who knows if this ship wo n't be 100 leagues out to sea ? if circumstances are in our favor , between ten and eleven this evening we 'll be landing on some piece of solid ground , or we 'll be dead . so we 're in god 's hands , and i 'll see you this evening ! "
just then a fairly loud hissing told me that the ballast tanks were filling , and the nautilus sank beneath the waves of the atlantic .
so i had to resign myself to my fate and get ready to escape . my baggage was n't heavy . my notes , nothing more .
as for captain nemo , i wondered what he would make of our escaping , what concern or perhaps what distress it might cause him , and what he would do in the twofold event of our attempt either failing or being found out ! certainly i had no complaints to register with him , on the contrary . never was hospitality more wholehearted than his . yet in leaving him i could n't be accused of ingratitude . no solemn promises bound us to him . in order to keep us captive , he had counted only on the force of circumstances and not on our word of honor . but his avowed intention to imprison us forever on his ship justified our every effort .
then i began to wonder if this eccentric individual was even on board . since that night when the skiff had left the nautilus on some mysterious mission , my ideas about him had subtly changed . in spite of everything , i thought that captain nemo must have kept up some type of relationship with the shore . did he himself never leave the nautilus ? whole weeks had often gone by without my encountering him . what was he doing all the while ? during all those times i 'd thought he was convalescing in the grip of some misanthropic fit , was he instead far away from the ship , involved in some secret activity whose nature still eluded me ?
all these ideas and a thousand others assaulted me at the same time . in these strange circumstances the scope for conjecture was unlimited . i felt an unbearable queasiness . this day of waiting seemed endless . the hours struck too slowly to keep up with my impatience .
crossing through the lounge , i arrived at the door , contrived in one of the canted corners , that opened into the captain 's stateroom . much to my astonishment , this door was ajar . i instinctively recoiled . if captain nemo was in his stateroom , he might see me . but , not hearing any sounds , i approached . the stateroom was deserted . i pushed the door open . i took a few steps inside . still the same austere , monastic appearance .
just then my eye was caught by some etchings hanging on the wall , which i had n't noticed during my first visit . they were portraits of great men of history who had spent their lives in perpetual devotion to a great human ideal : thaddeus kosciusko , the hero whose dying words had been finis poloniae ; markos botzaris , for modern greece the reincarnation of sparta 's king leonidas ; daniel o'connell , ireland 's defender ; george washington , founder of the american union ; daniele manin , the italian patriot ; abraham lincoln , dead from the bullet of a believer in slavery ; and finally , that martyr for the redemption of the black race , john brown , hanging from his gallows as victor hugo 's pencil has so terrifyingly depicted .
what was the bond between these heroic souls and the soul of captain nemo ? from this collection of portraits could i finally unravel the mystery of his existence ? was he a fighter for oppressed peoples , a liberator of enslaved races ? had he figured in the recent political or social upheavals of this century ? was he a hero of that dreadful civil war in america , a war lamentable yet forever glorious . . . ?
suddenly the clock struck eight . the first stroke of its hammer on the chime snapped me out of my musings . i shuddered as if some invisible eye had plunged into my innermost thoughts , and i rushed outside the stateroom .
there my eyes fell on the compass . our heading was still northerly . the log indicated a moderate speed , the pressure gauge a depth of about sixty feet . so circumstances were in favor of the canadian 's plans .
a few minutes before nine o'clock , i glued my ear to the captain 's door . not a sound . i left my stateroom and returned to the lounge , which was deserted and plunged in near darkness .
i opened the door leading to the library . the same inadequate light , the same solitude . i went to man my post near the door opening into the well of the central companionway . i waited for ned land 's signal .
the silence was further disturbed only by the pounding of my heart .
suddenly i felt a mild jolt . i realized the nautilus had come to rest on the ocean floor . my alarm increased . the canadian 's signal had n't reached me . i longed to rejoin ned land and urge him to postpone his attempt . i sensed that we were no longer navigating under normal conditions .
just then the door to the main lounge opened and captain nemo appeared . he saw me , and without further preamble :
" ah , professor , " he said in an affable tone , " i 've been looking for you . do you know your spanish history ? "
" well ? " captain nemo went on . " did you hear my question ? do you know the history of spain ? "
" very little of it , " i replied .
the captain stretched out on a couch , and i mechanically took a seat near him , but half in the shadows .
" professor , " he said , " listen carefully . this piece of history concerns you in one definite respect , because it will answer a question you 've no doubt been unable to resolve . "
" i 'm listening , captain , " i said , not knowing what my partner in this dialogue was driving at , and wondering if this incident related to our escape plans .
" professor , " captain nemo went on , " if you 're amenable , we 'll go back in time to 1702 . you 're aware of the fact that in those days your king louis xiv thought an imperial gesture would suffice to humble the pyrenees in the dust , so he inflicted his grandson , the duke of anjou , on the spaniards . reigning more or less poorly under the name king philip v , this aristocrat had to deal with mighty opponents abroad .
" in essence , the year before , the royal houses of holland , austria , and england had signed a treaty of alliance at the hague , aiming to wrest the spanish crown from king philip v and to place it on the head of an archduke whom they prematurely dubbed king charles iii .
" spain had to withstand these allies . but the country had practically no army or navy . yet it was n't short of money , provided that its galleons , laden with gold and silver from america , could enter its ports . now then , late in 1702 spain was expecting a rich convoy , which france ventured to escort with a fleet of twenty - three vessels under the command of admiral de chateau - renault , because by that time the allied navies were roving the atlantic .
" this convoy was supposed to put into cadiz , but after learning that the english fleet lay across those waterways , the admiral decided to make for a french port .
" the spanish commanders in the convoy objected to this decision . they wanted to be taken to a spanish port , if not to cadiz , then to the bay of vigo , located on spain 's northwest coast and not blockaded .
" admiral de chateau - renault was so indecisive as to obey this directive , and the galleons entered the bay of vigo .
" unfortunately this bay forms an open , offshore mooring that 's impossible to defend . so it was essential to hurry and empty the galleons before the allied fleets arrived , and there would have been ample time for this unloading , if a wretched question of trade agreements had n't suddenly come up .
" are you clear on the chain of events ? " captain nemo asked me .
" perfectly clear , " i said , not yet knowing why i was being given this history lesson .
" now then , just as this decision was being handed down , english vessels arrived in the bay of vigo on october 22 , 1702 . despite his inferior forces , admiral de chateau - renault fought courageously . but when he saw that the convoy 's wealth was about to fall into enemy hands , he burned and scuttled the galleons , which went to the bottom with their immense treasures . "
captain nemo stopped . i admit it : i still could n't see how this piece of history concerned me .
" well ? " i asked him .
the captain stood up and invited me to follow him . i 'd had time to collect myself . i did so . the lounge was dark , but the sea 's waves sparkled through the transparent windows . i stared .
around the nautilus for a half - mile radius , the waters seemed saturated with electric light . the sandy bottom was clear and bright . dressed in diving suits , crewmen were busy clearing away half - rotted barrels and disemboweled trunks in the midst of the dingy hulks of ships . out of these trunks and kegs spilled ingots of gold and silver , cascades of jewels , pieces of eight . the sand was heaped with them . then , laden with these valuable spoils , the men returned to the nautilus , dropped off their burdens inside , and went to resume this inexhaustible fishing for silver and gold .
i understood . this was the setting of that battle on october 22 , 1702 . here , in this very place , those galleons carrying treasure to the spanish government had gone to the bottom . here , whenever he needed , captain nemo came to withdraw these millions to ballast his nautilus . it was for him , for him alone , that america had yielded up its precious metals . he was the direct , sole heir to these treasures wrested from the incas and those peoples conquered by hernando cortez !
" did you know , professor , " he asked me with a smile , " that the sea contained such wealth ? "
" i know it 's estimated , " i replied , " that there are 2,000,000 metric tons of silver held in suspension in seawater . "
" surely , but in extracting that silver , your expenses would outweigh your profits . here , by contrast , i have only to pick up what other men have lost , and not only in this bay of vigo but at a thousand other sites where ships have gone down , whose positions are marked on my underwater chart . do you understand now that i 'm rich to the tune of billions ? "
" i understand , captain . nevertheless , allow me to inform you that by harvesting this very bay of vigo , you 're simply forestalling the efforts of a rival organization . "
" what organization ? "
" a company chartered by the spanish government to search for these sunken galleons . the company 's investors were lured by the bait of enormous gains , because this scuttled treasure is estimated to be worth 500,000,000 francs . "
no sooner had i voiced this regret than i felt it must have wounded captain nemo .
" no help ! " he replied with growing animation . " sir , what makes you assume this wealth goes to waste when i 'm the one amassing it ? do you think i toil to gather this treasure out of selfishness ? who says i do n't put it to good use ? do you think i 'm unaware of the suffering beings and oppressed races living on this earth , poor people to comfort , victims to avenge ? do n't you understand . . . ? "
captain nemo stopped on these last words , perhaps sorry that he had said too much . but i had guessed . whatever motives had driven him to seek independence under the seas , he remained a human being before all else ! his heart still throbbed for suffering humanity , and his immense philanthropy went out both to downtrodden races and to individuals !
and now i knew where captain nemo had delivered those millions , when the nautilus navigated the waters where crete was in rebellion against the ottoman empire !
chapter 9
a lost continent
the next morning , february 19 , i beheld the canadian entering my stateroom . i was expecting this visit . he wore an expression of great disappointment .
" well , sir ? " he said to me .
" well , ned , the fates were against us yesterday . " " yes ! that damned captain had to call a halt just as we were going to escape from his boat . "
" yes , ned , he had business with his bankers . "
" his bankers ? "
" anyhow , " he said , " it 's not over yet ! my first harpoon missed , that 's all ! we 'll succeed the next time , and as soon as this evening , if need be . . . "
" what 's the nautilus 's heading ? " i asked .
" i 've no idea , " ned replied .
" all right , at noon we 'll find out what our position is ! "
the canadian returned to conseil 's side . as soon as i was dressed , i went into the lounge . the compass was n't encouraging . the nautilus 's course was south - southwest . we were turning our backs on europe .
i could hardly wait until our position was reported on the chart . near 11:30 the ballast tanks emptied , and the submersible rose to the surface of the ocean . i leaped onto the platform . ned land was already there .
no more shore in sight . nothing but the immenseness of the sea . a few sails were on the horizon , no doubt ships going as far as cape so roque to find favorable winds for doubling the cape of good hope . the sky was overcast . a squall was on the way .
furious , ned tried to see through the mists on the horizon . he still hoped that behind all that fog there lay those shores he longed for .
at noon the sun made a momentary appearance . taking advantage of this rift in the clouds , the chief officer took the orb 's altitude . then the sea grew turbulent , we went below again , and the hatch closed once more .
as for me , i was n't exactly grief - stricken . i felt as if a heavy weight had been lifted from me , and i was able to resume my regular tasks in a state of comparative calm .
near eleven o'clock in the evening , i received a most unexpected visit from captain nemo . he asked me very graciously if i felt exhausted from our vigil the night before . i said no .
" then , professor aronnax , i propose an unusual excursion . "
" propose away , captain . "
" so far you 've visited the ocean depths only by day and under sunlight . would you like to see these depths on a dark night ? "
" very much . "
" i warn you , this will be an exhausting stroll . we 'll need to walk long hours and scale a mountain . the roads are n't terribly well kept up . "
" everything you say , captain , just increases my curiosity . i 'm ready to go with you . "
" then come along , professor , and we 'll go put on our diving suits . "
arriving at the wardrobe , i saw that neither my companions nor any crewmen would be coming with us on this excursion . captain nemo had n't even suggested my fetching ned or conseil .
in a few moments we had put on our equipment . air tanks , abundantly charged , were placed on our backs , but the electric lamps were not in readiness . i commented on this to the captain .
" they 'll be useless to us , " he replied .
i thought i had n't heard him right , but i could n't repeat my comment because the captain 's head had already disappeared into its metal covering . i finished harnessing myself , i felt an alpenstock being placed in my hand , and a few minutes later , after the usual procedures , we set foot on the floor of the atlantic , 300 meters down .
side by side , captain nemo and i walked directly toward this conspicuous flame . the level seafloor rose imperceptibly . we took long strides , helped by our alpenstocks ; but in general our progress was slow , because our feet kept sinking into a kind of slimy mud mixed with seaweed and assorted flat stones .
as we moved forward , i heard a kind of pitter - patter above my head . sometimes this noise increased and became a continuous crackle . i soon realized the cause . it was a heavy rainfall rattling on the surface of the waves . instinctively i worried that i might get soaked ! by water in the midst of water ! i could n't help smiling at this outlandish notion . but to tell the truth , wearing these heavy diving suits , you no longer feel the liquid element , you simply think you 're in the midst of air a little denser than air on land , that 's all .
after half an hour of walking , the seafloor grew rocky . jellyfish , microscopic crustaceans , and sea - pen coral lit it faintly with their phosphorescent glimmers . i glimpsed piles of stones covered by a couple million zoophytes and tangles of algae . my feet often slipped on this viscous seaweed carpet , and without my alpenstock i would have fallen more than once . when i turned around , i could still see the nautilus 's whitish beacon , which was starting to grow pale in the distance .
those piles of stones just mentioned were laid out on the ocean floor with a distinct but inexplicable symmetry . i spotted gigantic furrows trailing off into the distant darkness , their length incalculable . there also were other peculiarities i could n't make sense of . it seemed to me that my heavy lead soles were crushing a litter of bones that made a dry crackling noise . so what were these vast plains we were now crossing ? i wanted to ask the captain , but i still did n't grasp that sign language that allowed him to chat with his companions when they went with him on his underwater excursions .
our path was getting brighter and brighter . the red glow had turned white and was radiating from a mountain peak about 800 feet high . but what i saw was simply a reflection produced by the crystal waters of these strata . the furnace that was the source of this inexplicable light occupied the far side of the mountain .
in the midst of the stone mazes furrowing this atlantic seafloor , captain nemo moved forward without hesitation . he knew this dark path . no doubt he had often traveled it and was incapable of losing his way . i followed him with unshakeable confidence . he seemed like some spirit of the sea , and as he walked ahead of me , i marveled at his tall figure , which stood out in black against the glowing background of the horizon .
it was one o'clock in the morning . we arrived at the mountain 's lower gradients . but in grappling with them , we had to venture up difficult trails through a huge thicket .
what a sight ! how can i describe it ! how can i portray these woods and rocks in this liquid setting , their lower parts dark and sullen , their upper parts tinted red in this light whose intensity was doubled by the reflecting power of the waters ! we scaled rocks that crumbled behind us , collapsing in enormous sections with the hollow rumble of an avalanche . to our right and left there were carved gloomy galleries where the eye lost its way . huge glades opened up , seemingly cleared by the hand of man , and i sometimes wondered whether some residents of these underwater regions would suddenly appear before me .
and i too could feel the difference created by the water 's powerful density -- despite my heavy clothing , copper headpiece , and metal soles , i climbed the most impossibly steep gradients with all the nimbleness , i swear it , of a chamois or a pyrenees mountain goat !
as for my account of this excursion under the waters , i 'm well aware that it sounds incredible ! i 'm the chronicler of deeds seemingly impossible and yet incontestably real . this was no fantasy . this was what i saw and felt !
what was this astounding world that i did n't yet know ? in what order did these articulates belong , these creatures for which the rocks provided a second carapace ? where had nature learned the secret of their vegetating existence , and for how many centuries had they lived in the ocean 's lower strata ?
but i could n't linger . captain nemo , on familiar terms with these dreadful animals , no longer minded them . we arrived at a preliminary plateau where still other surprises were waiting for me . there picturesque ruins took shape , betraying the hand of man , not our creator . they were huge stacks of stones in which you could distinguish the indistinct forms of palaces and temples , now arrayed in hosts of blossoming zoophytes , and over it all , not ivy but a heavy mantle of algae and fucus plants .
but what part of the globe could this be , this land swallowed by cataclysms ? who had set up these rocks and stones like the dolmens of prehistoric times ? where was i , where had captain nemo 's fancies taken me ?
i wanted to ask him . unable to , i stopped him . i seized his arm . but he shook his head , pointed to the mountain 's topmost peak , and seemed to tell me :
" come on ! come with me ! come higher ! "
i followed him with one last burst of energy , and in a few minutes i had scaled the peak , which crowned the whole rocky mass by some ten meters .
i looked back down the side we had just cleared . there the mountain rose only 700 to 800 feet above the plains ; but on its far slope it crowned the receding bottom of this part of the atlantic by a height twice that . my eyes scanned the distance and took in a vast area lit by intense flashes of light . in essence , this mountain was a volcano . fifty feet below its peak , amid a shower of stones and slag , a wide crater vomited torrents of lava that were dispersed in fiery cascades into the heart of the liquid mass . so situated , this volcano was an immense torch that lit up the lower plains all the way to the horizon .
in fact , there beneath my eyes was a town in ruins , demolished , overwhelmed , laid low , its roofs caved in , its temples pulled down , its arches dislocated , its columns stretching over the earth ; in these ruins you could still detect the solid proportions of a sort of tuscan architecture ; farther off , the remains of a gigantic aqueduct ; here , the caked heights of an acropolis along with the fluid forms of a parthenon ; there , the remnants of a wharf , as if some bygone port had long ago harbored merchant vessels and triple - tiered war galleys on the shores of some lost ocean ; still farther off , long rows of collapsing walls , deserted thoroughfares , a whole pompeii buried under the waters , which captain nemo had resurrected before my eyes !
but captain nemo came over and stopped me with a gesture . then , picking up a piece of chalky stone , he advanced to a black basaltic rock and scrawled this one word :
the writer whose narratives record the lofty deeds of those heroic times is plato himself . his dialogues timaeus and critias were drafted with the poet and legislator solon as their inspiration , as it were .
one day solon was conversing with some elderly wise men in the egyptian capital of sais , a town already 8,000 years of age , as documented by the annals engraved on the sacred walls of its temples . one of these elders related the history of another town 1,000 years older still . this original city of athens , ninety centuries old , had been invaded and partly destroyed by the atlanteans . these atlanteans , he said , resided on an immense continent greater than africa and asia combined , taking in an area that lay between latitude 12 degrees and 40 degrees north . their dominion extended even to egypt . they tried to enforce their rule as far as greece , but they had to retreat before the indomitable resistance of the hellenic people . centuries passed . a cataclysm occurred -- floods , earthquakes . a single night and day were enough to obliterate this atlantis , whose highest peaks ( madeira , the azores , the canaries , the cape verde islands ) still emerge above the waves .
these were the historical memories that captain nemo 's scrawl sent rushing through my mind . thus , led by the strangest of fates , i was treading underfoot one of the mountains of that continent ! my hands were touching ruins many thousands of years old , contemporary with prehistoric times ! i was walking in the very place where contemporaries of early man had walked ! my heavy soles were crushing the skeletons of animals from the age of fable , animals that used to take cover in the shade of these trees now turned to stone !
oh , why was i so short of time ! i would have gone down the steep slopes of this mountain , crossed this entire immense continent , which surely connects africa with america , and visited its great prehistoric cities . under my eyes there perhaps lay the warlike town of makhimos or the pious village of eusebes , whose gigantic inhabitants lived for whole centuries and had the strength to raise blocks of stone that still withstood the action of the waters . one day perhaps , some volcanic phenomenon will bring these sunken ruins back to the surface of the waves ! numerous underwater volcanoes have been sighted in this part of the ocean , and many ships have felt terrific tremors when passing over these turbulent depths . a few have heard hollow noises that announced some struggle of the elements far below , others have hauled in volcanic ash hurled above the waves . as far as the equator this whole seafloor is still under construction by plutonic forces . and in some remote epoch , built up by volcanic disgorgings and successive layers of lava , who knows whether the peaks of these fire - belching mountains may reappear above the surface of the atlantic !
as i mused in this way , trying to establish in my memory every detail of this impressive landscape , captain nemo was leaning his elbows on a moss - covered monument , motionless as if petrified in some mute trance . was he dreaming of those lost generations , asking them for the secret of human destiny ? was it here that this strange man came to revive himself , basking in historical memories , reliving that bygone life , he who had no desire for our modern one ? i would have given anything to know his thoughts , to share them , understand them !
we stayed in this place an entire hour , contemplating its vast plains in the lava 's glow , which sometimes took on a startling intensity . inner boilings sent quick shivers running through the mountain 's crust . noises from deep underneath , clearly transmitted by the liquid medium , reverberated with majestic amplitude .
just then the moon appeared for an instant through the watery mass , casting a few pale rays over this submerged continent . it was only a fleeting glimmer , but its effect was indescribable . the captain stood up and took one last look at these immense plains ; then his hand signaled me to follow him .
we went swiftly down the mountain . once past the petrified forest , i could see the nautilus 's beacon twinkling like a star . the captain walked straight toward it , and we were back on board just as the first glimmers of dawn were whitening the surface of the ocean .
chapter 10 the underwater coalfields
the next day , february 20 , i overslept . i was so exhausted from the night before , i did n't get up until eleven o'clock . i dressed quickly . i hurried to find out the nautilus 's heading . the instruments indicated that it was running southward at a speed of twenty miles per hour and a depth of 100 meters .
conseil entered . i described our nocturnal excursion to him , and since the panels were open , he could still catch a glimpse of this submerged continent .
in essence , numerous fish had caught his eye , and when fish pass by , conseil vanishes into his world of classifying and leaves real life behind . in which case i could only tag along and resume our ichthyological research .
i climbed as far as the hatch . it was open . but instead of the broad daylight i was expecting , i found that i was surrounded by total darkness . where were we ? had i been mistaken ? was it still night ? no ! not one star was twinkling , and nighttime is never so utterly black .
i was n't sure what to think , when a voice said to me :
" is that you , professor ? "
" ah , captain nemo ! " i replied . " where are we ? "
" underground , professor . "
" underground ! " i exclaimed . " and the nautilus is still floating ? "
" it always floats . "
" but i do n't understand ! "
" wait a little while . our beacon is about to go on , and if you want some light on the subject , you 'll be satisfied . "
this stream of electricity dazzled my eyes , and after momentarily shutting them , i looked around . the nautilus was stationary . it was floating next to an embankment shaped like a wharf . as for the water now buoying the ship , it was a lake completely encircled by an inner wall about two miles in diameter , hence six miles around . its level -- as indicated by the pressure gauge -- would be the same as the outside level , because some connection had to exist between this lake and the sea . slanting inward over their base , these high walls converged to form a vault shaped like an immense upside - down funnel that measured 500 or 600 meters in height . at its summit there gaped the circular opening through which i had detected that faint glimmer , obviously daylight .
before more carefully examining the interior features of this enormous cavern , and before deciding if it was the work of nature or humankind , i went over to captain nemo .
" where are we ? " i said .
" in the very heart of an extinct volcano , " the captain answered me , " a volcano whose interior was invaded by the sea after some convulsion in the earth . while you were sleeping , professor , the nautilus entered this lagoon through a natural channel that opens ten meters below the surface of the ocean . this is our home port , secure , convenient , secret , and sheltered against winds from any direction ! along the coasts of your continents or islands , show me any offshore mooring that can equal this safe refuge for withstanding the fury of hurricanes . "
" indeed , " i replied , " here you 're in perfect safety , captain nemo . who could reach you in the heart of a volcano ? but do n't i see an opening at its summit ? "
" yes , its crater , a crater formerly filled with lava , steam , and flames , but which now lets in this life - giving air we 're breathing . "
" but which volcanic mountain is this ? " i asked .
" it 's one of the many islets with which this sea is strewn . for ships a mere reef , for us an immense cavern . i discovered it by chance , and chance served me well . "
" but could n't someone enter through the mouth of its crater ? "
" no more than i could exit through it . you can climb about 100 feet up the inner base of this mountain , but then the walls overhang , they lean too far in to be scaled . "
" i can see , captain , that nature is your obedient servant , any time or any place . you 're safe on this lake , and nobody else can visit its waters . but what 's the purpose of this refuge ? the nautilus does n't need a harbor . "
" no , professor , but it needs electricity to run , batteries to generate its electricity , sodium to feed its batteries , coal to make its sodium , and coalfields from which to dig its coal . now then , right at this spot the sea covers entire forests that sank underwater in prehistoric times ; today , turned to stone , transformed into carbon fuel , they offer me inexhaustible coal mines . "
" so , captain , your men practice the trade of miners here ? "
" and will we see your companions at work ? "
" no , at least not this time , because i 'm eager to continue our underwater tour of the world . accordingly , i 'll rest content with drawing on my reserve stock of sodium . we 'll stay here long enough to load it on board , in other words , a single workday , then we 'll resume our voyage . so , professor aronnax , if you 'd like to explore this cavern and circle its lagoon , seize the day . "
i thanked the captain and went to look for my two companions , who had n't yet left their cabin . i invited them to follow me , not telling them where we were . they climbed onto the platform . conseil , whom nothing could startle , saw it as a perfectly natural thing to fall asleep under the waves and wake up under a mountain . but ned land had no idea in his head other than to see if this cavern offered some way out .
after breakfast near ten o'clock , we went down onto the embankment .
" so here we are , back on shore , " conseil said .
" i 'd hardly call this shore , " the canadian replied . " and besides , we are n't on it but under it . "
the ground rose appreciably as it moved away from the sand flats by the waves , and we soon arrived at some long , winding gradients , genuinely steep paths that allowed us to climb little by little ; but we had to tread cautiously in the midst of pudding stones that were n't cemented together , and our feet kept skidding on glassy trachyte , made of feldspar and quartz crystals .
the volcanic nature of this enormous pit was apparent all around us . i ventured to comment on it to my companions .
" can you picture , " i asked them , " what this funnel must have been like when it was filled with boiling lava , and the level of that incandescent liquid rose right to the mountain 's mouth , like cast iron up the insides of a furnace ? "
" i can picture it perfectly , " conseil replied . " but will master tell me why this huge smelter suspended operations , and how it is that an oven was replaced by the tranquil waters of a lake ? "
" in all likelihood , conseil , because some convulsion created an opening below the surface of the ocean , the opening that serves as a passageway for the nautilus . then the waters of the atlantic rushed inside the mountain . there ensued a dreadful struggle between the elements of fire and water , a struggle ending in king neptune 's favor . but many centuries have passed since then , and this submerged volcano has changed into a peaceful cavern . "
" but ned my friend , " conseil answered , " if it were n't an underwater passageway , the nautilus could n't enter it ! "
" and i might add , mr . land , " i said , " that the waters would n't have rushed under the mountain , and the volcano would still be a volcano . so you have nothing to be sorry about . "
at an elevation of about thirty meters , the nature of the terrain changed without becoming any easier . pudding stones and trachyte gave way to black basaltic rock : here , lying in slabs all swollen with blisters ; there , shaped like actual prisms and arranged into a series of columns that supported the springings of this immense vault , a wonderful sample of natural architecture . then , among this basaltic rock , there snaked long , hardened lava flows inlaid with veins of bituminous coal and in places covered by wide carpets of sulfur . the sunshine coming through the crater had grown stronger , shedding a hazy light over all the volcanic waste forever buried in the heart of this extinct mountain .
we had arrived at the foot of a sturdy clump of dragon trees , which were splitting the rocks with exertions of their muscular roots , when ned land exclaimed :
" oh , sir , a hive ! "
" a hive ? " i answered , with a gesture of utter disbelief .
" yes , a hive , " the canadian repeated , " with bees buzzing around ! "
i went closer and was forced to recognize the obvious . at the mouth of a hole cut in the trunk of a dragon tree , there swarmed thousands of these ingenious insects so common to all the canary islands , where their output is especially prized .
" when i 've mixed this honey with our breadfruit batter , " he told us , " i 'll be ready to serve you a delectable piece of cake . "
" but of course , " conseil put in , " it will be gingerbread ! "
" i 'm all for gingerbread , " i said , " but let 's resume this fascinating stroll . "
at certain turns in the trail we were going along , the lake appeared in its full expanse . the ship 's beacon lit up that whole placid surface , which experienced neither ripples nor undulations . the nautilus lay perfectly still . on its platform and on the embankment , crewmen were bustling around , black shadows that stood out clearly in the midst of the luminous air .
by then we were forced to go back down to the beach because the ridge had become impossible . above us , the yawning crater looked like the wide mouth of a well . from where we stood , the sky was pretty easy to see , and i watched clouds race by , disheveled by the west wind , letting tatters of mist trail over the mountain 's summit . proof positive that those clouds kept at a moderate altitude , because this volcano did n't rise more than 1,800 feet above the level of the ocean .
half an hour after the canadian 's latest exploits , we were back on the inner beach . there the local flora was represented by a wide carpet of samphire , a small umbelliferous plant that keeps quite nicely , which also boasts the names glasswort , saxifrage , and sea fennel . conseil picked a couple bunches . as for the local fauna , it included thousands of crustaceans of every type : lobsters , hermit crabs , prawns , mysid shrimps , daddy longlegs , rock crabs , and a prodigious number of seashells , such as cowries , murex snails , and limpets .
we were stretched out in this delightful cave for an hour . our conversation , lively at the outset , then languished . a definite drowsiness overcame us . since i saw no good reason to resist the call of sleep , i fell into a heavy doze . i dreamed -- one does n't choose his dreams -- that my life had been reduced to the vegetating existence of a simple mollusk . it seemed to me that this cave made up my double - valved shell . . . .
suddenly conseil 's voice startled me awake .
" get up ! get up ! " shouted the fine lad .
" what is it ? " i asked , in a sitting position .
" the water 's coming up to us ! "
i got back on my feet . like a torrent the sea was rushing into our retreat , and since we definitely were not mollusks , we had to clear out .
in a few seconds we were safe on top of the cave .
" what happened ? " conseil asked . " some new phenomenon ? "
" not quite , my friends ! " i replied . " it was the tide , merely the tide , which wellnigh caught us by surprise just as it did sir walter scott 's hero ! the ocean outside is rising , and by a perfectly natural law of balance , the level of this lake is also rising . we 've gotten off with a mild dunking . let 's go change clothes on the nautilus . "
three - quarters of an hour later , we had completed our circular stroll and were back on board . just then the crewmen finished loading the sodium supplies , and the nautilus could have departed immediately . but captain nemo gave no orders . would he wait for nightfall and exit through his underwater passageway in secrecy ? perhaps . be that as it may , by the next day the nautilus had left its home port and was navigating well out from any shore , a few meters beneath the waves of the atlantic .
chapter 11
the sargasso sea
the nautilus did n't change direction . for the time being , then , we had to set aside any hope of returning to european seas . captain nemo kept his prow pointing south . where was he taking us ? i was afraid to guess .
now then , this second arm -- more accurately , a collar -- forms a ring of warm water around a section of cool , tranquil , motionless ocean called the sargasso sea . this is an actual lake in the open atlantic , and the great current 's waters take at least three years to circle it .
properly speaking , the sargasso sea covers every submerged part of atlantis . certain authors have even held that the many weeds strewn over this sea were torn loose from the prairies of that ancient continent . but it 's more likely that these grasses , algae , and fucus plants were carried off from the beaches of europe and america , then taken as far as this zone by the gulf stream . this is one of the reasons why christopher columbus assumed the existence of a new world . when the ships of that bold investigator arrived in the sargasso sea , they had great difficulty navigating in the midst of these weeds , which , much to their crews ' dismay , slowed them down to a halt ; and they wasted three long weeks crossing this sector .
such was the region our nautilus was visiting just then : a genuine prairie , a tightly woven carpet of algae , gulfweed , and bladder wrack so dense and compact a craft 's stempost could n't tear through it without difficulty . accordingly , not wanting to entangle his propeller in this weed - choked mass , captain nemo stayed at a depth some meters below the surface of the waves .
in the midst of this hopelessly tangled fabric of weeds and fucus plants , i noted some delightful pink - colored , star - shaped alcyon coral , sea anemone trailing the long tresses of their tentacles , some green , red , and blue jellyfish , and especially those big rhizostome jellyfish that cuvier described , whose bluish parasols are trimmed with violet festoons .
we spent the whole day of february 22 in the sargasso sea , where fish that dote on marine plants and crustaceans find plenty to eat . the next day the ocean resumed its usual appearance .
from this moment on , for nineteen days from february 23 to march 12 , the nautilus stayed in the middle of the atlantic , hustling us along at a constant speed of 100 leagues every twenty - four hours . it was obvious that captain nemo wanted to carry out his underwater program , and i had no doubt that he intended , after doubling cape horn , to return to the pacific south seas .
during those nineteen days just mentioned , no unique incidents distinguished our voyage . i saw little of the captain . he was at work . in the library i often found books he had left open , especially books on natural history . he had thumbed through my work on the great ocean depths , and the margins were covered with his notes , which sometimes contradicted my theories and formulations . but the captain remained content with this method of refining my work , and he rarely discussed it with me . sometimes i heard melancholy sounds reverberating from the organ , which he played very expressively , but only at night in the midst of the most secretive darkness , while the nautilus slumbered in the wilderness of the ocean .
finally , to conclude , conseil classified a large number of flying fish . nothing could have made a more unusual sight than the marvelous timing with which dolphins hunt these fish . whatever the range of its flight , however evasive its trajectory ( even up and over the nautilus ) , the hapless flying fish always found a dolphin to welcome it with open mouth . these were either flying gurnards or kitelike sea robins , whose lips glowed in the dark , at night scrawling fiery streaks in the air before plunging into the murky waters like so many shooting stars .
our navigating continued under these conditions until march 13 . that day the nautilus was put to work in some depth - sounding experiments that fascinated me deeply .
by then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our starting point in the pacific high seas . our position fix placed us in latitude 45 degrees 37 ' south and longitude 37 degrees 53 ' west . these were the same waterways where captain denham , aboard the herald , payed out 14,000 meters of sounding line without finding bottom . it was here too that lieutenant parker , aboard the american frigate congress , was unable to reach the underwater soil at 15,149 meters .
captain nemo decided to take his nautilus down to the lowest depths in order to double - check these different soundings . i got ready to record the results of this experiment . the panels in the lounge opened , and maneuvers began for reaching those strata so prodigiously far removed .
it was apparently considered out of the question to dive by filling the ballast tanks . perhaps they would n't sufficiently increase the nautilus 's specific gravity . moreover , in order to come back up , it would be necessary to expel the excess water , and our pumps might not have been strong enough to overcome the outside pressure .
captain nemo decided to make for the ocean floor by submerging on an appropriately gradual diagonal with the help of his side fins , which were set at a 45 degrees angle to the nautilus 's waterline . then the propeller was brought to its maximum speed , and its four blades churned the waves with indescribable violence .
i asked captain nemo if he had observed any fish at more considerable depths .
" no , professor , " the captain replied , " i would n't be so discourteous . yet i 'll ask you to explain how these creatures can live at such depths ? "
" i explain it on two grounds , " i replied . " in the first place , because vertical currents , which are caused by differences in the water 's salinity and density , can produce enough motion to sustain the rudimentary lifestyles of sea lilies and starfish . "
" true , " the captain put in .
" in the second place , because oxygen is the basis of life , and we know that the amount of oxygen dissolved in salt water increases rather than decreases with depth , that the pressure in these lower strata helps to concentrate their oxygen content . "
however , at 14,000 meters i saw blackish peaks rising in the midst of the waters . but these summits could have belonged to mountains as high or even higher than the himalayas or mt . blanc , and the extent of these depths remained incalculable .
despite the powerful pressures it was undergoing , the nautilus sank still deeper . i could feel its sheet - iron plates trembling down to their riveted joins ; metal bars arched ; bulkheads groaned ; the lounge windows seemed to be warping inward under the water 's pressure . and this whole sturdy mechanism would surely have given way , if , as its captain had said , it were n't capable of resisting like a solid block .
while grazing these rocky slopes lost under the waters , i still spotted some seashells , tube worms , lively annelid worms from the genus spirorbis , and certain starfish specimens .
" what an experience ! " i exclaimed . " traveling these deep regions where no man has ever ventured before ! look , captain ! look at these magnificent rocks , these uninhabited caves , these last global haunts where life is no longer possible ! what unheard - of scenery , and why are we reduced to preserving it only as a memory ? "
" would you like , " captain nemo asked me , " to bring back more than just a memory ? "
" what do you mean ? "
" i mean that nothing could be easier than taking a photograph of this underwater region ! "
i attach a print of the positive . in it you can view these primordial rocks that have never seen the light of day , this nether granite that forms the powerful foundation of our globe , the deep caves cut into the stony mass , the outlines of incomparable distinctness whose far edges stand out in black as if from the brush of certain flemish painters . in the distance is a mountainous horizon , a wondrously undulating line that makes up the background of this landscape . the general effect of these smooth rocks is indescribable : black , polished , without moss or other blemish , carved into strange shapes , sitting firmly on a carpet of sand that sparkled beneath our streams of electric light .
meanwhile , his photographic operations over , captain nemo told me :
" let 's go back up , professor . we must n't push our luck and expose the nautilus too long to these pressures . "
" let 's go back up ! " i replied .
" hold on tight . "
before i had time to realize why the captain made this recommendation , i was hurled to the carpet .
its fins set vertically , its propeller thrown in gear at the captain 's signal , the nautilus rose with lightning speed , shooting upward like an air balloon into the sky . vibrating resonantly , it knifed through the watery mass . not a single detail was visible . in four minutes it had cleared the four vertical leagues separating it from the surface of the ocean , and after emerging like a flying fish , it fell back into the sea , making the waves leap to prodigious heights .
chapter 12
sperm whales and baleen whales
during the night of march 13 - 14 , the nautilus resumed its southward heading . once it was abreast of cape horn , i thought it would strike west of the cape , make for pacific seas , and complete its tour of the world . it did nothing of the sort and kept moving toward the southernmost regions . so where was it bound ? the pole ? that was insanity . i was beginning to think that the captain 's recklessness more than justified ned land 's worst fears .
that day , march 14 , he and conseil managed to find me in my stateroom . i asked them the purpose of their visit .
" to put a simple question to you , sir , " the canadian answered me .
" go on , ned . "
" how many men do you think are on board the nautilus ? "
" i 'm unable to say , my friend . "
" all right , " the canadian said , " then why should there be any more than that ? "
" why ? " i answered .
i stared at ned land , whose motives were easy to guess .
" because , " i said , " if i can trust my hunches , if i truly understand the captain 's way of life , his nautilus is n't simply a ship . it 's meant to be a refuge for people like its commander , people who have severed all ties with the shore . "
" perhaps , " conseil said , " but in a nutshell , the nautilus can hold only a certain number of men , so could n't master estimate their maximum ? "
" how , conseil ? "
" by calculating it . master is familiar with the ship 's capacity , hence the amount of air it contains ; on the other hand , master knows how much air each man consumes in the act of breathing , and he can compare this data with the fact that the nautilus must rise to the surface every twenty - four hours . . . "
conseil did n't finish his sentence , but i could easily see what he was driving at .
" i follow you , " i said . " but while they 're simple to do , such calculations can give only a very uncertain figure . "
" no problem , " the canadian went on insistently .
" precisely , " conseil said .
" now then , " i went on , " the nautilus 's capacity is 1,500 metric tons , and that of a ton is 1,000 liters , so the nautilus holds 1,500,000 liters of air , which , divided by 2,400 . . . "
i did a quick pencil calculation .
" . . . gives us the quotient of 625 . which is tantamount to saying that the air contained in the nautilus would be exactly enough for 625 men over twenty - four hours . "
" 625 ! " ned repeated .
" but rest assured , " i added , " that between passengers , seamen , or officers , we do n't total one - tenth of that figure . "
" which is still too many for three men ! " conseil muttered .
" so , my poor ned , i can only counsel patience . "
" and , " conseil replied , " even more than patience , resignation . " conseil had said the true word .
the canadian shook his head , passed his hand over his brow , made no reply , and left us .
to be sure , the monotony of life on board must have seemed unbearable to the canadian , who was accustomed to freedom and activity . it was a rare event that could excite him . that day , however , a development occurred that reminded him of his happy years as a harpooner .
near eleven o'clock in the morning , while on the surface of the ocean , the nautilus fell in with a herd of baleen whales . this encounter did n't surprise me , because i knew these animals were being hunted so relentlessly that they took refuge in the ocean basins of the high latitudes .
" why , ned ! " i replied . " you still are n't over your old fishing urges ? "
" you 've never fished these seas , ned ? "
" never , sir . just the northernmost seas , equally in the bering strait and the davis strait . "
" so the southern right whale is still unknown to you . until now it 's the bowhead whale you 've hunted , and it wo n't risk going past the warm waters of the equator . "
" oh , professor , what are you feeding me ? " the canadian answered in a tolerably skeptical tone .
" i 'm feeding you the facts . "
" by thunder ! in ' 65 , just two and a half years ago , i to whom you speak , i myself stepped onto the carcass of a whale near greenland , and its flank still carried the marked harpoon of a whaling ship from the bering sea . now i ask you , after it had been wounded west of america , how could this animal be killed in the east , unless it had cleared the equator and doubled cape horn or the cape of good hope ? "
" i agree with our friend ned , " conseil said , " and i 'm waiting to hear how master will reply to him . "
" master will reply , my friends , that baleen whales are localized , according to species , within certain seas that they never leave . and if one of these animals went from the bering strait to the davis strait , it 's quite simply because there 's some passageway from the one sea to the other , either along the coasts of canada or siberia . "
" you expect us to fall for that ? " the canadian asked , tipping me a wink .
" if master says so , " conseil replied .
" which means , " the canadian went on , " since i 've never fished these waterways , i do n't know the whales that frequent them ? "
" that 's what i 've been telling you , ned . "
" all the more reason to get to know them , " conseil answered .
ned stamped his foot . brandishing an imaginary harpoon , his hands positively trembled .
" these cetaceans , " he asked , " are they as big as the ones in the northernmost seas ? "
" pretty nearly , ned . "
then , going on with his conversation :
" you talk about sperm whales , " he said , " as if they were little beasts ! but there are stories of gigantic sperm whales . they 're shrewd cetaceans . i hear that some will cover themselves with algae and fucus plants . people mistake them for islets . they pitch camp on top , make themselves at home , light a fire-- "
" build houses , " conseil said .
" yes , funny man , " ned land replied . " then one fine day the animal dives and drags all its occupants down into the depths . "
" like in the voyages of sinbad the sailor , " i answered , laughing . " oh , mr . land , you 're addicted to tall tales ! what sperm whales you 're handing us ! i hope you do n't really believe in them ! "
" mr . naturalist , " the canadian replied in all seriousness , " when it comes to whales , you can believe anything ! ( look at that one move ! look at it stealing away ! ) people claim these animals can circle around the world in just fifteen days . "
" i do n't say nay . "
" but what you undoubtedly do n't know , professor aronnax , is that at the beginning of the world , whales traveled even quicker . "
" oh really , ned ! and why so ? "
" because in those days their tails moved side to side , like those on fish , in other words , their tails were straight up , thrashing the water from left to right , right to left . but spotting that they swam too fast , our creator twisted their tails , and ever since they 've been thrashing the waves up and down , at the expense of their speed . "
" fine , ned , " i said , then resurrected one of the canadian 's expressions . " you expect us to fall for that ? "
" not too terribly , " ned land replied , " and no more than if i told you there are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds . "
" that 's indeed considerable , " i said . " but you must admit that certain cetaceans do grow to significant size , since they 're said to supply as much as 120 metric tons of oil . "
" that i 've seen , " the canadian said .
" i can easily believe it , ned , just as i can believe that certain baleen whales equal 100 elephants in bulk . imagine the impact of such a mass if it were launched at full speed ! "
" is it true , " conseil asked , " that they can sink ships ? "
" ships ? i doubt it , " i replied . " however , they say that in 1820 , right in these southern seas , a baleen whale rushed at the essex and pushed it backward at a speed of four meters per second . its stern was flooded , and the essex went down fast . "
ned looked at me with a bantering expression .
" speaking for myself , " he said , " i once got walloped by a whale 's tail-- in my longboat , needless to say . my companions and i were launched to an altitude of six meters . but next to the professor 's whale , mine was just a baby . "
" do these animals live a long time ? " conseil asked .
" a thousand years , " the canadian replied without hesitation .
" and how , ned , " i asked , " do you know that 's so ? "
" because people say so . "
" and why do people say so ? "
" because people know so . "
ned land did n't understand . he no longer even heard me . that baleen whale kept coming closer . his eyes devoured it .
" oh ! " he exclaimed . " it 's not just one whale , it 's ten , twenty , a whole gam ! and i ca n't do a thing ! i 'm tied hand and foot ! "
" but ned my friend , " conseil said , " why not ask captain nemo for permission to hunt-- "
captain nemo observed the herd of cetaceans cavorting on the waters a mile from the nautilus .
" they 're southern right whales , " he said . " there goes the fortune of a whole whaling fleet . "
" hunt them ? what for ? " captain nemo replied . " simply to destroy them ? we have no use for whale oil on this ship . "
" but , sir , " the canadian went on , " in the red sea you authorized us to chase a dugong ! "
" there it was an issue of obtaining fresh meat for my crew . here it would be killing for the sake of killing . i 'm well aware that 's a privilege reserved for mankind , but i do n't allow such murderous pastimes . when your peers , mr . land , destroy decent , harmless creatures like the southern right whale or the bowhead whale , they commit a reprehensible offense . thus they 've already depopulated all of baffin bay , and they 'll wipe out a whole class of useful animals . so leave these poor cetaceans alone . they have quite enough natural enemies , such as sperm whales , swordfish , and sawfish , without you meddling with them . "
i 'll let the reader decide what faces the canadian made during this lecture on hunting ethics . furnishing such arguments to a professional harpooner was a waste of words . ned land stared at captain nemo and obviously missed his meaning . but the captain was right . thanks to the mindless , barbaric bloodthirstiness of fishermen , the last baleen whale will someday disappear from the ocean .
ned land whistled " yankee doodle " between his teeth , stuffed his hands in his pockets , and turned his back on us .
meanwhile captain nemo studied the herd of cetaceans , then addressed me :
" i was right to claim that baleen whales have enough natural enemies without counting man . these specimens will soon have to deal with mighty opponents . eight miles to leeward , professor aronnax , can you see those blackish specks moving about ? "
" yes , captain , " i replied .
" those are sperm whales , dreadful animals that i 've sometimes encountered in herds of 200 or 300 ! as for them , they 're cruel , destructive beasts , and they deserve to be exterminated . "
the canadian turned swiftly at these last words .
" well , captain , " i said , " on behalf of the baleen whales , there 's still time-- "
" it 's pointless to run any risks , professor . the nautilus will suffice to disperse these sperm whales . it 's armed with a steel spur quite equal to mr . land 's harpoon , i imagine . "
the canadian did n't even bother shrugging his shoulders . attacking cetaceans with thrusts from a spur ! who ever heard of such malarkey !
" wait and see , professor aronnax , " captain nemo said . " we 'll show you a style of hunting with which you are n't yet familiar . we 'll take no pity on these ferocious cetaceans . they 're merely mouth and teeth ! "
meanwhile that monstrous herd kept coming closer . it had seen the baleen whales and was preparing to attack . you could tell in advance that the sperm whales would be victorious , not only because they were better built for fighting than their harmless adversaries , but also because they could stay longer underwater before returning to breathe at the surface .
there was just time to run to the rescue of the baleen whales . the nautilus proceeded to midwater . conseil , ned , and i sat in front of the lounge windows . captain nemo made his way to the helmsman 's side to operate his submersible as an engine of destruction . soon i felt the beats of our propeller getting faster , and we picked up speed .
the battle between sperm whales and baleen whales had already begun when the nautilus arrived . it maneuvered to cut into the herd of long - skulled predators . at first the latter showed little concern at the sight of this new monster meddling in the battle . but they soon had to sidestep its thrusts .
what bloodshed ! what a hubbub on the surface of the waves ! what sharp hisses and snorts unique to these frightened animals ! their tails churned the normally peaceful strata into actual billows .
finally this mass of sperm whales thinned out . the waves grew tranquil again . i felt us rising to the surface of the ocean . the hatch opened and we rushed onto the platform .
" well , mr . land ? " he said .
" it was a slaughter of destructive animals , " the captain replied , " and the nautilus is no butcher knife . "
" i prefer my harpoon , " the canadian answered .
" to each his own , " the captain replied , staring intently at ned land .
i was in dread the latter would give way to some violent outburst that might have had deplorable consequences . but his anger was diverted by the sight of a baleen whale that the nautilus had pulled alongside of just then .
captain nemo guided the nautilus next to the animal 's corpse . two of his men climbed onto the whale 's flank , and to my astonishment , i saw them draw from its udders all the milk they held , in other words , enough to fill two or three casks .
from that day on , i noted with some uneasiness that ned land 's attitudes toward captain nemo grew worse and worse , and i decided to keep a close watch on the canadian 's movements and activities .
chapter 13
the ice bank
on march 14 at latitude 55 degrees , i spotted floating ice , plain pale bits of rubble twenty to twenty - five feet long , which formed reefs over which the sea burst into foam . the nautilus stayed on the surface of the ocean . having fished in the arctic seas , ned land was already familiar with the sight of icebergs . conseil and i were marveling at them for the first time .
in the sky toward the southern horizon , there stretched a dazzling white band . english whalers have given this the name " ice blink . " no matter how heavy the clouds may be , they ca n't obscure this phenomenon . it announces the presence of a pack , or shoal , of ice .
indeed , larger blocks of ice soon appeared , their brilliance varying at the whim of the mists . some of these masses displayed green veins , as if scrawled with undulating lines of copper sulfate . others looked like enormous amethysts , letting the light penetrate their insides . the latter reflected the sun 's rays from the thousand facets of their crystals . the former , tinted with a bright limestone sheen , would have supplied enough building material to make a whole marble town .
guided by his skillful hands , the nautilus passed by all these different masses of ice , which are classified by size and shape with a precision that enraptured conseil : " icebergs , " or mountains ; " ice fields , " or smooth , limitless tracts ; " drift ice , " or floating floes ; " packs , " or broken tracts , called " patches " when they 're circular and " streams " when they form long strips .
the temperature was fairly low . exposed to the outside air , the thermometer marked -2 degrees to -3 degrees centigrade . but we were warmly dressed in furs , for which seals and aquatic bears had paid the price . evenly heated by all its electric equipment , the nautilus 's interior defied the most intense cold . moreover , to find a bearable temperature , the ship had only to sink just a few meters beneath the waves .
two months earlier we would have enjoyed perpetual daylight in this latitude ; but night already fell for three or four hours , and later it would cast six months of shadow over these circumpolar regions .
" but where 's he going ? " i asked .
" straight ahead , " conseil replied . " ultimately , when he ca n't go any farther , he 'll stop . "
" i would n't bet on it ! " i replied .
and in all honesty , i confess that this venturesome excursion was far from displeasing to me . i ca n't express the intensity of my amazement at the beauties of these new regions . the ice struck superb poses . here , its general effect suggested an oriental town with countless minarets and mosques . there , a city in ruins , flung to the ground by convulsions in the earth . these views were varied continuously by the sun 's oblique rays , or were completely swallowed up by gray mists in the middle of blizzards . then explosions , cave - ins , and great iceberg somersaults would occur all around us , altering the scenery like the changing landscape in a diorama .
often , no longer seeing any way out , i thought we were imprisoned for good , but captain nemo , guided by his instincts , discovered new passageways from the tiniest indications . he was never wrong when he observed slender threads of bluish water streaking through these ice fields . accordingly , i was sure that he had already risked his nautilus in the midst of the antarctic seas .
however , during the day of march 16 , these tracts of ice completely barred our path . it was n't the ice bank as yet , just huge ice fields cemented together by the cold . this obstacle could n't stop captain nemo , and he launched his ship against the ice fields with hideous violence . the nautilus went into these brittle masses like a wedge , splitting them with dreadful cracklings . it was an old - fashioned battering ram propelled with infinite power . hurled aloft , ice rubble fell back around us like hail . through brute force alone , the submersible carved out a channel for itself . carried away by its momentum , the ship sometimes mounted on top of these tracts of ice and crushed them with its weight , or at other times , when cooped up beneath the ice fields , it split them with simple pitching movements , creating wide punctures .
violent squalls assaulted us during the daytime . thanks to certain heavy mists , we could n't see from one end of the platform to the other . the wind shifted abruptly to every point on the compass . the snow was piling up in such packed layers , it had to be chipped loose with blows from picks . even in a temperature of merely -5 degrees centigrade , every outside part of the nautilus was covered with ice . a ship 's rigging would have been unusable , because all its tackle would have jammed in the grooves of the pulleys . only a craft without sails , driven by an electric motor that needed no coal , could face such high latitudes .
under these conditions the barometer generally stayed quite low . it fell as far as 73.5 centimeters . our compass indications no longer offered any guarantees . the deranged needles would mark contradictory directions as we approached the southern magnetic pole , which does n't coincide with the south pole proper . in fact , according to the astronomer hansteen , this magnetic pole is located fairly close to latitude 70 degrees and longitude 130 degrees , or abiding by the observations of louis - isidore duperrey , in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 70 degrees 30 ' . hence we had to transport compasses to different parts of the ship , take many readings , and strike an average . often we could chart our course only by guesswork , a less than satisfactory method in the midst of these winding passageways whose landmarks change continuously .
at last on march 18 , after twenty futile assaults , the nautilus was decisively held in check . no longer was it an ice stream , patch , or field -- it was an endless , immovable barrier formed by ice mountains fused to each other .
" the ice bank ! " the canadian told me .
for ned land , as well as for every navigator before us , i knew that this was the great insurmountable obstacle . when the sun appeared for an instant near noon , captain nemo took a reasonably accurate sight that gave our position as longitude 51 degrees 30 ' and latitude 67 degrees 39 ' south . this was a position already well along in these antarctic regions .
so the nautilus had to halt in its venturesome course among these tracts of ice .
" sir , " ned land told me that day , " if your captain goes any farther . . . "
" yes ? "
" he 'll be a superman . "
" how so , ned ? "
" correct , ned land , but i still want to know what 's behind this ice bank ! behold my greatest source of irritation -- a wall ! "
" fine ! " the canadian put in . " but we already know what 's behind this ice bank . "
" what ? " i asked .
" ice , ice , and more ice . "
" you may be sure of that , ned , " i answered , " but i 'm not . that 's why i want to see for myself . "
" well , professor , " the canadian replied , " you can just drop that idea ! you 've made it to the ice bank , which is already far enough , but you wo n't get any farther , neither your captain nemo or his nautilus . and whether he wants to or not , we 'll head north again , in other words , to the land of sensible people . "
i had to agree that ned land was right , and until ships are built to navigate over tracts of ice , they 'll have to stop at the ice bank .
just then i was on the platform . observing the situation for some while , the captain said to me :
" well , professor ! what think you ? "
" i think we 're trapped , captain . "
" trapped ! what do you mean ? "
" so , professor aronnax , you think the nautilus wo n't be able to float clear ? "
" only with the greatest difficulty , captain , since the season is already too advanced for you to depend on an ice breakup . "
" farther south ? " i asked , gaping at the captain .
" yes , sir , it will go to the pole . "
" to the pole ! " i exclaimed , unable to keep back a movement of disbelief .
" yes , " the captain replied coolly , " the antarctic pole , that unknown spot crossed by every meridian on the globe . as you know , i do whatever i like with my nautilus . "
yes , i did know that ! i knew this man was daring to the point of being foolhardy . but to overcome all the obstacles around the south pole -- even more unattainable than the north pole , which still had n't been reached by the boldest navigators-- was n't this an absolutely insane undertaking , one that could occur only in the brain of a madman ?
it then dawned on me to ask captain nemo if he had already discovered this pole , which no human being had ever trod underfoot .
" no , sir , " he answered me , " but we 'll discover it together . where others have failed , i 'll succeed . never before has my nautilus cruised so far into these southernmost seas , but i repeat : it will go farther still . "
" over it , professor ? " captain nemo replied serenely . " no , not over it , but under it . "
" under it ! " i exclaimed .
a sudden insight into captain nemo 's plans had just flashed through my mind . i understood . the marvelous talents of his nautilus would be put to work once again in this superhuman undertaking !
" i can see we 're starting to understand each other , professor , " captain nemo told me with a half smile . " you already glimpse the potential -- myself , i 'd say the success -- of this attempt . maneuvers that are n't feasible for an ordinary ship are easy for the nautilus . if a continent emerges at the pole , we 'll stop at that continent . but on the other hand , if open sea washes the pole , we 'll go to that very place ! "
" right , " i said , carried away by the captain 's logic . " even though the surface of the sea has solidified into ice , its lower strata are still open , thanks to that divine justice that puts the maximum density of salt water one degree above its freezing point . and if i 'm not mistaken , the submerged part of this ice bank is in a four - to - one ratio to its emerging part . "
" very nearly , professor . for each foot of iceberg above the sea , there are three more below . now then , since these ice mountains do n't exceed a height of 100 meters , they sink only to a depth of 300 meters . and what are 300 meters to the nautilus ? "
" a mere nothing , sir . "
" we could even go to greater depths and find that temperature layer common to all ocean water , and there we 'd brave with impunity the -30 degrees or -40 degrees cold on the surface . "
" true , sir , very true , " i replied with growing excitement .
" our sole difficulty , " captain nemo went on , " lies in our staying submerged for several days without renewing our air supply . "
" that 's all ? " i answered . " the nautilus has huge air tanks ; we 'll fill them up and they 'll supply all the oxygen we need . "
" good thinking , professor aronnax , " the captain replied with a smile . " but since i do n't want to be accused of foolhardiness , i 'm giving you all my objections in advance . "
" you have more ? "
" just one . if a sea exists at the south pole , it 's possible this sea may be completely frozen over , so we could n't come up to the surface ! "
" my dear sir , have you forgotten that the nautilus is armed with a fearsome spur ? could n't it be launched diagonally against those tracts of ice , which would break open from the impact ? "
" ah , professor , you 're full of ideas today ! "
" i think as you do , professor aronnax , " captain nemo replied . " i 'll only point out that after raising so many objections against my plan , you 're now crushing me under arguments in its favor . "
captain nemo was right . i was outdoing him in daring ! it was i who was sweeping him to the pole . i was leading the way , i was out in front . . . but no , you silly fool ! captain nemo already knew the pros and cons of this question , and it amused him to see you flying off into impossible fantasies !
nevertheless , he did n't waste an instant . at his signal , the chief officer appeared . the two men held a quick exchange in their incomprehensible language , and either the chief officer had been alerted previously or he found the plan feasible , because he showed no surprise .
" honestly , sir , " he told me . " you and your captain nemo , i pity you both ! "
" but we will go to the pole , mr . land . "
" maybe , but you wo n't come back ! "
and ned land reentered his cabin , " to keep from doing something desperate , " he said as he left me .
meanwhile preparations for this daring attempt were getting under way . the nautilus 's powerful pumps forced air down into the tanks and stored it under high pressure . near four o'clock captain nemo informed me that the platform hatches were about to be closed . i took a last look at the dense ice bank we were going to conquer . the weather was fair , the skies reasonably clear , the cold quite brisk , namely -12 degrees centigrade ; but after the wind had lulled , this temperature did n't seem too unbearable .
equipped with picks , some ten men climbed onto the nautilus 's sides and cracked loose the ice around the ship 's lower plating , which was soon set free . this operation was swiftly executed because the fresh ice was still thin . we all reentered the interior . the main ballast tanks were filled with the water that had n't yet congealed at our line of flotation . the nautilus submerged without delay .
about 300 meters down , just as captain nemo had predicted , we cruised beneath the undulating surface of the ice bank . but the nautilus sank deeper still . it reached a depth of 800 meters . at the surface this water gave a temperature of -12 degrees centigrade , but now it gave no more than -10 degrees . two degrees had already been gained . thanks to its heating equipment , the nautilus 's temperature , needless to say , stayed at a much higher degree . every maneuver was accomplished with extraordinary precision .
" i fully expect to ! " i replied in a tone of deep conviction .
for part of the night , the novelty of our circumstances kept conseil and me at the lounge window . the sea was lit by our beacon 's electric rays . but the depths were deserted . fish did n't linger in these imprisoned waters . here they found merely a passageway for going from the antarctic ocean to open sea at the pole . our progress was swift . you could feel it in the vibrations of the long steel hull .
near two o'clock in the morning , i went to snatch a few hours of sleep . conseil did likewise . i did n't encounter captain nemo while going down the gangways . i assumed that he was keeping to the pilothouse .
the next day , march 19 , at five o'clock in the morning , i was back at my post in the lounge . the electric log indicated that the nautilus had reduced speed . by then it was rising to the surface , but cautiously , while slowly emptying its ballast tanks .
my heart was pounding . would we emerge into the open and find the polar air again ?
no . a jolt told me that the nautilus had bumped the underbelly of the ice bank , still quite thick to judge from the hollowness of the accompanying noise . indeed , we had " struck bottom , " to use nautical terminology , but in the opposite direction and at a depth of 3,000 feet . that gave us 4,000 feet of ice overhead , of which 1,000 feet emerged above water . so the ice bank was higher here than we had found it on the outskirts . a circumstance less than encouraging .
i meticulously noted these different depths , obtaining the underwater profile of this upside - down mountain chain that stretched beneath the sea .
by evening there was still no improvement in our situation . the ice stayed between 400 and 500 meters deep . it was obviously shrinking , but what a barrier still lay between us and the surface of the ocean !
by then it was eight o'clock . the air inside the nautilus should have been renewed four hours earlier , following daily practice on board . but i did n't suffer very much , although captain nemo had n't yet made demands on the supplementary oxygen in his air tanks .
that night my sleep was fitful . hope and fear besieged me by turns . i got up several times . the nautilus continued groping . near three o'clock in the morning , i observed that we encountered the ice bank 's underbelly at a depth of only fifty meters . so only 150 feet separated us from the surface of the water . little by little the ice bank was turning into an ice field again . the mountains were changing back into plains .
my eyes did n't leave the pressure gauge . we kept rising on a diagonal , going along this shiny surface that sparkled beneath our electric rays . above and below , the ice bank was subsiding in long gradients . mile after mile it was growing thinner .
finally , at six o'clock in the morning on that memorable day of march 19 , the lounge door opened . captain nemo appeared .
" open sea ! " he told me .
chapter 14
the south pole
i rushed up onto the platform . yes , open sea ! barely a few sparse floes , some moving icebergs ; a sea stretching into the distance ; hosts of birds in the air and myriads of fish under the waters , which varied from intense blue to olive green depending on the depth . the thermometer marked 3 degrees centigrade . it was as if a comparative springtime had been locked up behind that ice bank , whose distant masses were outlined on the northern horizon .
" are we at the pole ? " i asked the captain , my heart pounding .
" i 've no idea , " he answered me . " at noon we 'll fix our position . "
" but will the sun show through this mist ? " i said , staring at the grayish sky .
" no matter how faintly it shines , it will be enough for me , " the captain replied .
to the south , ten miles from the nautilus , a solitary islet rose to a height of 200 meters . we proceeded toward it , but cautiously , because this sea could have been strewn with reefs .
in an hour we had reached the islet . two hours later we had completed a full circle around it . it measured four to five miles in circumference . a narrow channel separated it from a considerable shore , perhaps a continent whose limits we could n't see . the existence of this shore seemed to bear out commander maury 's hypotheses . in essence , this ingenious american has noted that between the south pole and the 60th parallel , the sea is covered with floating ice of dimensions much greater than any found in the north atlantic . from this fact he drew the conclusion that the antarctic circle must contain considerable shores , since icebergs ca n't form on the high seas but only along coastlines . according to his calculations , this frozen mass enclosing the southernmost pole forms a vast ice cap whose width must reach 4,000 kilometers .
a few strokes of the oar brought the skiff to the sand , where it ran aground . just as conseil was about to jump ashore , i held him back .
" sir , " i told captain nemo , " to you belongs the honor of first setting foot on this shore . "
" yes , sir , " the captain replied , " and if i have no hesitation in treading this polar soil , it 's because no human being until now has left a footprint here . "
so saying , he leaped lightly onto the sand . his heart must have been throbbing with intense excitement . he scaled an overhanging rock that ended in a small promontory and there , mute and motionless , with crossed arms and blazing eyes , he seemed to be laying claim to these southernmost regions . after spending five minutes in this trance , he turned to us .
" whenever you 're ready , sir , " he called to me .
i got out , conseil at my heels , leaving the two men in the skiff .
the beach was strewn with mollusks : small mussels , limpets , smooth heart - shaped cockles , and especially some sea butterflies with oblong , membrane - filled bodies whose heads are formed from two rounded lobes . i also saw myriads of those northernmost sea butterflies three centimeters long , which a baleen whale can swallow by the thousands in one gulp . the open waters at the shoreline were alive with these delightful pteropods , true butterflies of the sea .
among other zoophytes present in these shallows , there were a few coral tree forms that , according to sir james clark ross , live in these antarctic seas at depths as great as 1,000 meters ; then small alcyon coral belonging to the species procellaria pelagica , also a large number of starfish unique to these climes , plus some feather stars spangling the sand .
but it was in the air that life was superabundant . there various species of birds flew and fluttered by the thousands , deafening us with their calls . crowding the rocks , other fowl watched without fear as we passed and pressed familiarly against our feet . these were auks , as agile and supple in water , where they are sometimes mistaken for fast bonito , as they are clumsy and heavy on land . they uttered outlandish calls and participated in numerous public assemblies that featured much noise but little action .
" with that minor addition , " conseil replied , " these fowl would make perfect lamps ! after this , we should insist that nature equip them with wicks in advance ! "
meanwhile the mists did n't clear , and by eleven o'clock the sun still had n't made an appearance . its absence disturbed me . without it , no sights were possible . then how could we tell whether we had reached the pole ?
when i rejoined captain nemo , i found him leaning silently against a piece of rock and staring at the sky . he seemed impatient , baffled . but what could we do ? this daring and powerful man could n't control the sun as he did the sea .
noon arrived without the orb of day appearing for a single instant . you could n't even find its hiding place behind the curtain of mist . and soon this mist began to condense into snow .
" until tomorrow , " the captain said simply ; and we went back to the nautilus , amid flurries in the air .
during our absence the nets had been spread , and i observed with fascination the fish just hauled on board . the antarctic seas serve as a refuge for an extremely large number of migratory fish that flee from storms in the subpolar zones , in truth only to slide down the gullets of porpoises and seals . i noted some one - decimeter southern bullhead , a species of whitish cartilaginous fish overrun with bluish gray stripes and armed with stings , then some antarctic rabbitfish three feet long , the body very slender , the skin a smooth silver white , the head rounded , the topside furnished with three fins , the snout ending in a trunk that curved back toward the mouth . i sampled its flesh but found it tasteless , despite conseil 's views , which were largely approving .
the blizzard lasted until the next day . it was impossible to stay on the platform . from the lounge , where i was writing up the incidents of this excursion to the polar continent , i could hear the calls of petrel and albatross cavorting in the midst of the turmoil . the nautilus did n't stay idle , and cruising along the coast , it advanced some ten miles farther south amid the half light left by the sun as it skimmed the edge of the horizon .
the next day , march 20 , it stopped snowing . the cold was a little more brisk . the thermometer marked -2 degrees centigrade . the mist had cleared , and on that day i hoped our noon sights could be accomplished .
" ye gods , " conseil said , " it 's fortunate that ned land did n't come with us ! "
" why so , conseil ? "
" because that madcap hunter would kill every animal here . "
" every animal may be overstating it , but in truth i doubt we could keep our canadian friend from harpooning some of these magnificent cetaceans . which would be an affront to captain nemo , since he hates to slay harmless beasts needlessly . "
" he 's right . "
" certainly , conseil . but tell me , have n't you finished classifying these superb specimens of marine fauna ? "
" master is well aware , " conseil replied , " that i 'm not seasoned in practical application . when master has told me these animals ' names . . . "
" they 're seals and walruses . "
it was eight o'clock in the morning . we had four hours to ourselves before the sun could be productively observed . i guided our steps toward a huge bay that made a crescent - shaped incision in the granite cliffs along the beach .
i drew conseil 's attention to the considerable growth of the cerebral lobes found in these intelligent cetaceans . no mammal except man has more abundant cerebral matter . accordingly , seals are quite capable of being educated ; they make good pets , and together with certain other naturalists , i think these animals can be properly trained to perform yeoman service as hunting dogs for fishermen .
" are these animals dangerous ? " conseil asked me .
" only if they 're attacked , " i replied . " but when these giant seals defend their little ones , their fury is dreadful , and it is n't rare for them to smash a fisherman 's longboat to bits . "
" they 're within their rights , " conseil answered .
" i do n't say nay . "
two miles farther on , we were stopped by a promontory that screened the bay from southerly winds . it dropped straight down to the sea , and surf foamed against it . from beyond this ridge there came fearsome bellows , such as a herd of cattle might produce .
" gracious , " conseil put in , " a choir of bulls ? "
" no , " i said , " a choir of walruses . " " are they fighting with each other ? "
" either fighting or playing . "
" with all due respect to master , this we must see . "
" then see it we must , conseil . "
and there we were , climbing these blackish rocks amid sudden landslides and over stones slippery with ice . more than once i took a tumble at the expense of my backside . conseil , more cautious or more stable , barely faltered and would help me up , saying :
" if master 's legs would kindly adopt a wider stance , master will keep his balance . "
arriving at the topmost ridge of this promontory , i could see vast white plains covered with walruses . these animals were playing among themselves . they were howling not in anger but in glee .
passing near these unusual animals , i could examine them at my leisure since they did n't stir . their hides were rough and heavy , a tan color leaning toward a reddish brown ; their coats were short and less than abundant . some were four meters long . more tranquil and less fearful than their northern relatives , they posted no sentinels on guard duty at the approaches to their campsite .
yet i decided to return to the nautilus . we went along a steep , narrow path that ran over the cliff 's summit . by 11:30 we had arrived at our landing place . the beached skiff had brought the captain ashore . i spotted him standing on a chunk of basalt . his instruments were beside him . his eyes were focused on the northern horizon , along which the sun was sweeping in its extended arc .
i found a place near him and waited without speaking . noon arrived , and just as on the day before , the sun did n't put in an appearance .
i shared my thoughts and fears with captain nemo .
" you 're right , professor aronnax , " he told me . " if i ca n't take the sun 's altitude tomorrow , i wo n't be able to try again for another six months . but precisely because sailors ' luck has led me into these seas on march 21 , it will be easy to get our bearings if the noonday sun does appear before our eyes . "
" why easy , captain ? "
" because when the orb of day sweeps in such long spirals , it 's difficult to measure its exact altitude above the horizon , and our instruments are open to committing serious errors . "
" then what can you do ? "
" i use only my chronometer , " captain nemo answered me . " at noon tomorrow , march 21 , if , after accounting for refraction , the sun 's disk is cut exactly in half by the northern horizon , that will mean i 'm at the south pole . "
" right , " i said . " nevertheless , it is n't mathematically exact proof , because the equinox need n't fall precisely at noon . "
" no doubt , sir , but the error will be under 100 meters , and that 's close enough for us . until tomorrow then . "
the next day , march 21 , bright and early at five o'clock in the morning , i climbed onto the platform . i found captain nemo there .
" the weather is clearing a bit , " he told me . " i have high hopes . after breakfast we 'll make our way ashore and choose an observation post . "
this issue settled , i went to find ned land . i wanted to take him with me . the obstinate canadian refused , and i could clearly see that his tight - lipped mood and his bad temper were growing by the day . under the circumstances i ultimately was n't sorry that he refused . in truth , there were too many seals ashore , and it would never do to expose this impulsive fisherman to such temptations .
breakfast over , i made my way ashore . the nautilus had gone a few more miles during the night . it lay well out , a good league from the coast , which was crowned by a sharp peak 400 to 500 meters high . in addition to me , the skiff carried captain nemo , two crewmen , and the instruments -- in other words , a chronometer , a spyglass , and a barometer .
i also noted long , whitish strings of salps , a type of mollusk found in clusters , and some jellyfish of large size that swayed in the eddies of the billows .
by nine o'clock we had pulled up to shore . the sky was growing brighter . clouds were fleeing to the south . mists were rising from the cold surface of the water . captain nemo headed toward the peak , which he no doubt planned to make his observatory . it was an arduous climb over sharp lava and pumice stones in the midst of air often reeking with sulfurous fumes from the smoke holes . for a man out of practice at treading land , the captain scaled the steepest slopes with a supple agility i could n't equal , and which would have been envied by hunters of pyrenees mountain goats .
it took us two hours to reach the summit of this half - crystal , half - basalt peak . from there our eyes scanned a vast sea , which scrawled its boundary line firmly against the background of the northern sky . at our feet : dazzling tracts of white . over our heads : a pale azure , clear of mists . north of us : the sun 's disk , like a ball of fire already cut into by the edge of the horizon . from the heart of the waters : jets of liquid rising like hundreds of magnificent bouquets . far off , like a sleeping cetacean : the nautilus . behind us to the south and east : an immense shore , a chaotic heap of rocks and ice whose limits we could n't see .
arriving at the summit of this peak , captain nemo carefully determined its elevation by means of his barometer , since he had to take this factor into account in his noon sights .
at 11:45 the sun , by then seen only by refraction , looked like a golden disk , dispersing its last rays over this deserted continent and down to these seas not yet plowed by the ships of man .
" noon ! " i called .
" the south pole ! " captain nemo replied in a solemn voice , handing me the spyglass , which showed the orb of day cut into two exactly equal parts by the horizon .
" in the name of which sovereign , captain ? "
" in my own name , sir ! "
so saying , captain nemo unfurled a black flag bearing a gold " n " on its quartered bunting . then , turning toward the orb of day , whose last rays were licking at the sea 's horizon :
" farewell , o sun ! " he called . " disappear , o radiant orb ! retire beneath this open sea , and let six months of night spread their shadows over my new domains ! "
chapter 15
accident or incident ?
the thermometer marked -12 degrees centigrade , and a fresh breeze left a sharp nip in the air . ice floes were increasing over the open water . the sea was starting to congeal everywhere . numerous blackish patches were spreading over its surface , announcing the imminent formation of fresh ice . obviously this southernmost basin froze over during its six - month winter and became utterly inaccessible . what happened to the whales during this period ? no doubt they went beneath the ice bank to find more feasible seas . as for seals and walruses , they were accustomed to living in the harshest climates and stayed on in these icy waterways . these animals know by instinct how to gouge holes in the ice fields and keep them continually open ; they go to these holes to breathe . once the birds have migrated northward to escape the cold , these marine mammals remain as sole lords of the polar continent .
meanwhile the ballast tanks filled with water and the nautilus sank slowly . at a depth of 1,000 feet , it stopped . its propeller churned the waves and it headed due north at a speed of fifteen miles per hour . near the afternoon it was already cruising under the immense frozen carapace of the ice bank .
at three o'clock in the morning , i was awakened by a violent collision . i sat up in bed , listening in the darkness , and then was suddenly hurled into the middle of my stateroom . apparently the nautilus had gone aground , then heeled over sharply .
in its interior i heard the sound of footsteps and muffled voices . but captain nemo did n't appear . just as i was about to leave the lounge , ned land and conseil entered .
" what happened ? " i instantly said to them .
" i came to ask master that , " conseil replied .
" damnation ! " the canadian exclaimed . " i know full well what happened ! the nautilus has gone aground , and judging from the way it 's listing , i do n't think it 'll pull through like that first time in the torres strait . "
" but , " i asked , " are we at least back on the surface of the sea ? "
" we have no idea , " conseil replied .
" it 's easy to find out , " i answered . i consulted the pressure gauge . much to my surprise , it indicated a depth of 360 meters .
" what 's the meaning of this ? " i exclaimed .
" we must confer with captain nemo , " conseil said .
" but where do we find him ? " ned land asked .
" follow me , " i told my two companions .
we left the lounge . nobody in the library . nobody by the central companionway or the crew 's quarters . i assumed that captain nemo was stationed in the pilothouse . best to wait . the three of us returned to the lounge .
i 'll skip over the canadian 's complaints . he had good grounds for an outburst . i did n't answer him back , letting him blow off all the steam he wanted .
we had been left to ourselves for twenty minutes , trying to detect the tiniest noises inside the nautilus , when captain nemo entered . he did n't seem to see us . his facial features , usually so emotionless , revealed a certain uneasiness . he studied the compass and pressure gauge in silence , then went and put his finger on the world map at a spot in the sector depicting the southernmost seas .
i hesitated to interrupt him . but some moments later , when he turned to me , i threw back at him a phrase he had used in the torres strait :
" an incident , captain ? "
" no , sir , " he replied , " this time an accident . "
" serious ? "
" perhaps . "
" is there any immediate danger ? "
" no . "
" the nautilus has run aground ? "
" yes . "
" and this accident came about . . . ? "
captain nemo had picked an odd time to philosophize . all in all , this reply told me nothing .
" may i learn , sir , " i asked him , " what caused this accident ? "
" an enormous block of ice , an entire mountain , has toppled over , " he answered me . " when an iceberg is eroded at the base by warmer waters or by repeated collisions , its center of gravity rises . then it somersaults , it turns completely upside down . that 's what happened here . when it overturned , one of these blocks hit the nautilus as it was cruising under the waters . sliding under our hull , this block then raised us with irresistible power , lifting us into less congested strata where we now lie on our side . "
" but ca n't we float the nautilus clear by emptying its ballast tanks , to regain our balance ? "
" that , sir , is being done right now . you can hear the pumps working . look at the needle on the pressure gauge . it indicates that the nautilus is rising , but this block of ice is rising with us , and until some obstacle halts its upward movement , our position wo n't change . "
indeed , the nautilus kept the same heel to starboard . no doubt it would straighten up once the block came to a halt . but before that happened , who knew if we might not hit the underbelly of the ice bank and be hideously squeezed between two frozen surfaces ?
i mused on all the consequences of this situation . captain nemo did n't stop studying the pressure gauge . since the toppling of this iceberg , the nautilus had risen about 150 feet , but it still stayed at the same angle to the perpendicular .
suddenly a slight movement could be felt over the hull . obviously the nautilus was straightening a bit . objects hanging in the lounge were visibly returning to their normal positions . the walls were approaching the vertical . nobody said a word . hearts pounding , we could see and feel the ship righting itself . the floor was becoming horizontal beneath our feet . ten minutes went by .
" finally , we 're upright ! " i exclaimed .
" yes , " captain nemo said , heading to the lounge door .
" but will we float off ? " i asked him .
" certainly , " he replied , " since the ballast tanks are n't yet empty , and when they are , the nautilus must rise to the surface of the sea . "
the captain went out , and soon i saw that at his orders , the nautilus had halted its upward movement . in fact , it soon would have hit the underbelly of the ice bank , but it had stopped in time and was floating in midwater .
" that was a close call ! " conseil then said .
" yes . we could have been crushed between these masses of ice , or at least imprisoned between them . and then , with no way to renew our air supply . . . . yes , that was a close call ! "
" if it 's over with ! " ned land muttered .
i was unwilling to get into a pointless argument with the canadian and did n't reply . moreover , the panels opened just then , and the outside light burst through the uncovered windows .
" how beautiful ! " conseil exclaimed .
" yes , " i said , " it 's a wonderful sight ! is n't it , ned ? "
ned was right . it was too beautiful . all at once a yell from conseil made me turn around .
" what is it ? " i asked .
" master must close his eyes ! master must n't look ! " with that , conseil clapped his hands over his eyes .
" but what 's wrong , my boy ? "
" i 've been dazzled , struck blind ! "
involuntarily my eyes flew to the window , but i could n't stand the fire devouring it .
i realized what had happened . the nautilus had just started off at great speed . all the tranquil glimmers of the ice walls had then changed into blazing streaks . the sparkles from these myriads of diamonds were merging with each other . swept along by its propeller , the nautilus was traveling through a sheath of flashing light .
then the panels in the lounge closed . we kept our hands over our eyes , which were utterly saturated with those concentric gleams that swirl before the retina when sunlight strikes it too intensely . it took some time to calm our troubled vision .
finally we lowered our hands .
" ye gods , i never would have believed it , " conseil said .
" and i still do n't believe it ! " the canadian shot back .
" when we return to shore , jaded from all these natural wonders , " conseil added , " think how we 'll look down on those pitiful land masses , those puny works of man ! no , the civilized world wo n't be good enough for us ! "
such words from the lips of this emotionless flemish boy showed that our enthusiasm was near the boiling point . but the canadian did n't fail to throw his dram of cold water over us .
" the civilized world ! " he said , shaking his head . " do n't worry , conseil my friend , we 're never going back to that world ! "
" we 're going astern ? " conseil said .
" yes , " i replied . " apparently the tunnel has no way out at this end . "
" and so . . . ? "
" so , " i said , " our maneuvers are quite simple . we 'll return in our tracks and go out the southern opening . that 's all . "
as i spoke , i tried to sound more confident than i really felt . meanwhile the nautilus accelerated its backward movement , and running with propeller in reverse , it swept us along at great speed .
" this'll mean a delay , " ned said .
" what are a few hours more or less , so long as we get out . "
" yes , " ned land repeated , " so long as we get out ! "
a quarter of an hour later , conseil approached me , saying :
" is it deeply fascinating , this volume master is reading ? "
" tremendously fascinating , " i replied .
" i believe it . master is reading his own book ! "
" my own book ? "
indeed , my hands were holding my own work on the great ocean depths . i had n't even suspected . i closed the book and resumed my strolling . ned and conseil stood up to leave .
" stay here , my friends , " i said , stopping them . " let 's stay together until we 're out of this blind alley . "
" as master wishes , " conseil replied .
the hours passed . i often studied the instruments hanging on the lounge wall . the pressure gauge indicated that the nautilus stayed at a constant depth of 300 meters , the compass that it kept heading south , the log that it was traveling at a speed of twenty miles per hour , an excessive speed in such a cramped area . but captain nemo knew that by this point there was no such thing as too fast , since minutes were now worth centuries .
at 8:25 a second collision took place . this time astern . i grew pale . my companions came over . i clutched conseil 's hand . our eyes questioned each other , and more directly than if our thoughts had been translated into words .
just then the captain entered the lounge . i went to him .
" our path is barred to the south ? " i asked him .
" yes , sir . when it overturned , that iceberg closed off every exit . "
" we 're boxed in ? "
" yes . "
chapter 16
shortage of air
consequently , above , below , and around the nautilus , there were impenetrable frozen walls . we were the ice bank 's prisoners ! the canadian banged a table with his fearsome fist . conseil kept still . i stared at the captain . his face had resumed its usual emotionlessness . he crossed his arms . he pondered . the nautilus did not stir .
the captain then broke into speech :
" gentlemen , " he said in a calm voice , " there are two ways of dying under the conditions in which we 're placed . "
this inexplicable individual acted like a mathematics professor working out a problem for his pupils .
" the first way , " he went on , " is death by crushing . the second is death by asphyxiation . i do n't mention the possibility of death by starvation because the nautilus 's provisions will certainly last longer than we will . therefore , let 's concentrate on our chances of being crushed or asphyxiated . "
" as for asphyxiation , captain , " i replied , " that is n't a cause for alarm , because the air tanks are full . "
" true , " captain nemo went on , " but they 'll supply air for only two days . now then , we 've been buried beneath the waters for thirty - six hours , and the nautilus 's heavy atmosphere already needs renewing . in another forty - eight hours , our reserve air will be used up . "
" well then , captain , let 's free ourselves within forty - eight hours ! "
" we 'll try to at least , by cutting through one of these walls surrounding us . "
" which one ? " i asked .
" borings will tell us that . i 'm going to ground the nautilus on the lower shelf , then my men will put on their diving suits and attack the thinnest of these ice walls . "
" can the panels in the lounge be left open ? "
" without ill effect . we 're no longer in motion . "
captain nemo went out . hissing sounds soon told me that water was being admitted into the ballast tanks . the nautilus slowly settled and rested on the icy bottom at a depth of 350 meters , the depth at which the lower shelf of ice lay submerged .
" my friends , " i said , " we 're in a serious predicament , but i 'm counting on your courage and energy . "
" sir , " the canadian replied , " this is no time to bore you with my complaints . i 'm ready to do anything i can for the common good . "
" excellent , ned , " i said , extending my hand to the canadian .
" he wo n't turn down your assistance . come along , ned . "
after ned was dressed , i reentered the lounge , whose windows had been uncovered ; stationed next to conseil , i examined the strata surrounding and supporting the nautilus .
some moments later , we saw a dozen crewmen set foot on the shelf of ice , among them ned land , easily recognized by his tall figure . captain nemo was with them .
work began immediately and was carried on with tireless tenacity . instead of digging all around the nautilus , which would have entailed even greater difficulties , captain nemo had an immense trench outlined on the ice , eight meters from our port quarter . then his men simultaneously staked it off at several points around its circumference . soon their picks were vigorously attacking this compact matter , and huge chunks were loosened from its mass . these chunks weighed less than the water , and by an unusual effect of specific gravity , each chunk took wing , as it were , to the roof of the tunnel , which thickened above by as much as it diminished below . but this hardly mattered so long as the lower surface kept growing thinner .
after two hours of energetic work , ned land reentered , exhausted . he and his companions were replaced by new workmen , including conseil and me . the nautilus 's chief officer supervised us .
the water struck me as unusually cold , but i warmed up promptly while wielding my pick . my movements were quite free , although they were executed under a pressure of thirty atmospheres .
after two hours of work , reentering to snatch some food and rest , i found a noticeable difference between the clean elastic fluid supplied me by the rouquayrol device and the nautilus 's atmosphere , which was already charged with carbon dioxide . the air had n't been renewed in forty - eight hours , and its life - giving qualities were considerably weakened . meanwhile , after twelve hours had gone by , we had removed from the outlined surface area a slice of ice only one meter thick , hence about 600 cubic meters . assuming the same work would be accomplished every twelve hours , it would still take five nights and four days to see the undertaking through to completion .
" five nights and four days ! " i told my companions . " and we have oxygen in the air tanks for only two days . "
" without taking into account , " ned answered , " that once we 're out of this damned prison , we 'll still be cooped up beneath the ice bank , without any possible contact with the open air ! "
an apt remark . for who could predict the minimum time we would need to free ourselves ? before the nautilus could return to the surface of the waves , could n't we all die of asphyxiation ? were this ship and everyone on board doomed to perish in this tomb of ice ? it was a dreadful state of affairs . but we faced it head - on , each one of us determined to do his duty to the end .
during the night , in line with my forecasts , a new one - meter slice was removed from this immense socket . but in the morning , wearing my diving suit , i was crossing through the liquid mass in a temperature of -6 degrees to -7 degrees centigrade , when i noted that little by little the side walls were closing in on each other . the liquid strata farthest from the trench , not warmed by the movements of workmen and tools , were showing a tendency to solidify . in the face of this imminent new danger , what would happen to our chances for salvation , and how could we prevent this liquid medium from solidifying , then cracking the nautilus 's hull like glass ?
i did n't tell my two companions about this new danger . there was no point in dampening the energy they were putting into our arduous rescue work . but when i returned on board , i mentioned this serious complication to captain nemo .
" i know , " he told me in that calm tone the most dreadful outlook could n't change . " it 's one more danger , but i do n't know any way of warding it off . our sole chance for salvation is to work faster than the water solidifies . we 've got to get there first , that 's all . "
get there first ! by then i should have been used to this type of talk !
that evening captain nemo was forced to open the spigots of his air tanks and shoot a few spouts of fresh oxygen through the nautilus 's interior . without this precaution we would n't have awakened the following morning .
the next day , march 26 , i returned to my miner 's trade , working to remove the fifth meter . the ice bank 's side walls and underbelly had visibly thickened . obviously they would come together before the nautilus could break free . for an instant i was gripped by despair . my pick nearly slipped from my hands . what was the point of this digging if i was to die smothered and crushed by this water turning to stone , a torture undreamed of by even the wildest savages ! i felt like i was lying in the jaws of a fearsome monster , jaws irresistibly closing .
supervising our work , working himself , captain nemo passed near me just then . i touched him with my hand and pointed to the walls of our prison . the starboard wall had moved forward to a point less than four meters from the nautilus 's hull .
the captain understood and gave me a signal to follow him . we returned on board . my diving suit removed , i went with him to the lounge .
" professor aronnax , " he told me , " this calls for heroic measures , or we 'll be sealed up in this solidified water as if it were cement . "
" yes ! " i said . " but what can we do ? "
" oh , " he exclaimed , " if only my nautilus were strong enough to stand that much pressure without being crushed ! "
" well ? " i asked , not catching the captain 's meaning .
" do n't you understand , " he went on , " that the congealing of this water could come to our rescue ? do n't you see that by solidifying , it could burst these tracts of ice imprisoning us , just as its freezing can burst the hardest stones ? are n't you aware that this force could be the instrument of our salvation rather than our destruction ? "
" yes , captain , maybe so . but whatever resistance to crushing the nautilus may have , it still could n't stand such dreadful pressures , and it would be squashed as flat as a piece of sheet iron . "
" i know it , sir . so we ca n't rely on nature to rescue us , only our own efforts . we must counteract this solidification . we must hold it in check . not only are the side walls closing in , but there are n't ten feet of water ahead or astern of the nautilus . all around us , this freeze is gaining fast . "
" how long , " i asked , " will the oxygen in the air tanks enable us to breathe on board ? "
the captain looked me straight in the eye . " after tomorrow , " he said , " the air tanks will be empty ! "
i broke out in a cold sweat . but why should i have been startled by this reply ? on march 22 the nautilus had dived under the open waters at the pole . it was now the 26th . we had lived off the ship 's stores for five days ! and all remaining breathable air had to be saved for the workmen . even today as i write these lines , my sensations are so intense that an involuntary terror sweeps over me , and my lungs still seem short of air !
meanwhile , motionless and silent , captain nemo stood lost in thought . an idea visibly crossed his mind . but he seemed to brush it aside . he told himself no . at last these words escaped his lips :
" boiling water ! " he muttered .
" boiling water ? " i exclaimed .
" yes , sir . we 're shut up in a relatively confined area . if the nautilus 's pumps continually injected streams of boiling water into this space , would n't that raise its temperature and delay its freezing ? "
" it 's worth trying ! " i said resolutely .
" so let 's try it , professor . "
after i monitored the operation 's progress , double - checking it with many inspections , i told the captain , " it 's working . "
" i think so , " he answered me . " we 've escaped being crushed . now we have only asphyxiation to fear . "
during the night the water temperature rose to -1 degrees centigrade . the injections could n't get it to go a single degree higher . but since salt water freezes only at -2 degrees , i was finally assured that there was no danger of it solidifying .
by the next day , march 27 , six meters of ice had been torn from the socket . only four meters were left to be removed . that still meant forty - eight hours of work . the air could n't be renewed in the nautilus 's interior . accordingly , that day it kept getting worse .
an unbearable heaviness weighed me down . near three o'clock in the afternoon , this agonizing sensation affected me to an intense degree . yawns dislocated my jaws . my lungs were gasping in their quest for that enkindling elastic fluid required for breathing , now growing scarcer and scarcer . my mind was in a daze . i lay outstretched , strength gone , nearly unconscious . my gallant conseil felt the same symptoms , suffered the same sufferings , yet never left my side . he held my hand , he kept encouraging me , and i even heard him mutter :
" oh , if only i did n't have to breathe , to leave more air for master ! "
it brought tears to my eyes to hear him say these words .
and yet nobody prolonged his underwater work beyond the time allotted him . his shift over , each man surrendered to a gasping companion the air tank that would revive him . captain nemo set the example and was foremost in submitting to this strict discipline . when his time was up , he yielded his equipment to another and reentered the foul air on board , always calm , unflinching , and uncomplaining .
that day the usual work was accomplished with even greater energy . over the whole surface area , only two meters were left to be removed . only two meters separated us from the open sea . but the ship 's air tanks were nearly empty . the little air that remained had to be saved for the workmen . not an atom for the nautilus !
when i returned on board , i felt half suffocated . what a night ! i 'm unable to depict it . such sufferings are indescribable . the next day i was short - winded . headaches and staggering fits of dizziness made me reel like a drunk . my companions were experiencing the same symptoms . some crewmen were at their last gasp .
that day , the sixth of our imprisonment , captain nemo concluded that picks and mattocks were too slow to deal with the ice layer still separating us from open water -- and he decided to crush this layer . the man had kept his energy and composure . he had subdued physical pain with moral strength . he could still think , plan , and act .
just then the whole crew returned on board , and the double outside door was closed . by this point the nautilus was resting on a bed of ice only one meter thick and drilled by bores in a thousand places .
the stopcocks of the ballast tanks were then opened wide , and 100 cubic meters of water rushed in , increasing the nautilus 's weight by 100,000 kilograms .
we waited , we listened , we forgot our sufferings , we hoped once more . we had staked our salvation on this one last gamble .
" we 're going through ! " conseil muttered in my ear .
i could n't answer him . i clutched his hand . i squeezed it in an involuntary convulsion .
all at once , carried away by its frightful excess load , the nautilus sank into the waters like a cannonball , in other words , dropping as if in a vacuum !
our full electric power was then put on the pumps , which instantly began to expel water from the ballast tanks . after a few minutes we had checked our fall . the pressure gauge soon indicated an ascending movement . brought to full speed , the propeller made the sheet - iron hull tremble down to its rivets , and we sped northward .
but how long would it take to navigate under the ice bank to the open sea ? another day ? i would be dead first !
half lying on a couch in the library , i was suffocating . my face was purple , my lips blue , my faculties in abeyance . i could no longer see or hear . i had lost all sense of time . my muscles had no power to contract .
suddenly i regained consciousness . a few whiffs of air had entered my lungs . had we risen to the surface of the waves ? had we cleared the ice bank ?
my eyes flew toward the clock . it was eleven in the morning . it had to be march 28 . the nautilus was traveling at the frightful speed of forty miles per hour . it was writhing in the waters .
where was captain nemo ? had he perished ? had his companions died with him ?
just then the pressure gauge indicated we were no more than twenty feet from the surface . separating us from the open air was a mere tract of ice . could we break through it ?
the hatches were opened -- or torn off , if you prefer -- and waves of clean air were admitted into every part of the nautilus .
chapter 17
from cape horn to the amazon
how i got onto the platform i 'm unable to say . perhaps the canadian transferred me there . but i could breathe , i could inhale the life - giving sea air . next to me my two companions were getting tipsy on the fresh oxygen particles . poor souls who have suffered from long starvation must n't pounce heedlessly on the first food given them . we , on the other hand , did n't have to practice such moderation : we could suck the atoms from the air by the lungful , and it was the breeze , the breeze itself , that poured into us this luxurious intoxication !
" ahhh ! " conseil was putting in . " what fine oxygen ! let master have no fears about breathing . there 's enough for everyone . "
as for ned land , he did n't say a word , but his wide - open jaws would have scared off a shark . and what powerful inhalations ! the canadian " drew " like a furnace going full blast .
our strength returned promptly , and when i looked around , i saw that we were alone on the platform . no crewmen . not even captain nemo . those strange seamen on the nautilus were content with the oxygen circulating inside . not one of them had come up to enjoy the open air .
" good lord , professor , " ned land answered me , " do n't mention it ! what did we do that 's so praiseworthy ? not a thing . it was a question of simple arithmetic . your life is worth more than ours . so we had to save it . "
" no , ned , " i replied , " it is n't worth more . nobody could be better than a kind and generous man like yourself ! "
" all right , all right ! " the canadian repeated in embarrassment .
" and you , my gallant conseil , you suffered a great deal . "
" my friends , " i replied , very moved , " we 're bound to each other forever , and i 'm deeply indebted to you-- "
" which i 'll take advantage of , " the canadian shot back .
" eh ? " conseil put in .
" yes , " ned land went on . " you can repay your debt by coming with me when i leave this infernal nautilus . "
" by the way , " conseil said , " are we going in a favorable direction ? "
" yes , " i replied , " because we 're going in the direction of the sun , and here the sun is due north . "
i had no reply to this , and i feared that captain nemo would n't take us homeward but rather into that huge ocean washing the shores of both asia and america . in this way he would complete his underwater tour of the world , going back to those seas where the nautilus enjoyed the greatest freedom . but if we returned to the pacific , far from every populated shore , what would happen to ned land 's plans ?
we would soon settle this important point . the nautilus traveled swiftly . soon we had cleared the antarctic circle plus the promontory of cape horn . we were abreast of the tip of south america by march 31 at seven o'clock in the evening .
by then all our past sufferings were forgotten . the memory of that imprisonment under the ice faded from our minds . we had thoughts only of the future . captain nemo no longer appeared , neither in the lounge nor on the platform . the positions reported each day on the world map were put there by the chief officer , and they enabled me to determine the nautilus 's exact heading . now then , that evening it became obvious , much to my satisfaction , that we were returning north by the atlantic route .
i shared the results of my observations with the canadian and conseil .
" that 's good news , " the canadian replied , " but where 's the nautilus going ? "
" i 'm unable to say , ned . "
" after the south pole , does our captain want to tackle the north pole , then go back to the pacific by the notorious northwest passage ? "
" i would n't double dare him , " conseil replied .
" oh well , " the canadian said , " we 'll give him the slip long before then . "
" in any event , " conseil added , " he 's a superman , that captain nemo , and we 'll never regret having known him . "
" especially once we 've left him , " ned land shot back .
the next day , april 1 , when the nautilus rose to the surface of the waves a few minutes before noon , we raised land to the west . it was tierra del fuego , the land of fire , a name given it by early navigators after they saw numerous curls of smoke rising from the natives ' huts . this land of fire forms a huge cluster of islands over thirty leagues long and eighty leagues wide , extending between latitude 53 degrees and 56 degrees south , and between longitude 67 degrees 50 ' and 77 degrees 15 ' west . its coastline looked flat , but high mountains rose in the distance . i even thought i glimpsed mt . sarmiento , whose elevation is 2,070 meters above sea level : a pyramid - shaped block of shale with a very sharp summit , which , depending on whether it 's clear or veiled in vapor , " predicts fair weather or foul , " as ned land told me .
" a first - class barometer , my friend . "
" yes , sir , a natural barometer that did n't let me down when i navigated the narrows of the strait of magellan . "
just then its peak appeared before us , standing out distinctly against the background of the skies . this forecast fair weather . and so it proved .
going back under the waters , the nautilus drew near the coast , cruising along it for only a few miles . through the lounge windows i could see long creepers and gigantic fucus plants , bulb - bearing seaweed of which the open sea at the pole had revealed a few specimens ; with their smooth , viscous filaments , they measured as much as 300 meters long ; genuine cables more than an inch thick and very tough , they 're often used as mooring lines for ships . another weed , known by the name velp and boasting four - foot leaves , was crammed into the coral concretions and carpeted the ocean floor . it served as both nest and nourishment for myriads of crustaceans and mollusks , for crabs and cuttlefish . here seals and otters could indulge in a sumptuous meal , mixing meat from fish with vegetables from the sea , like the english with their irish stews .
the nautilus passed over these lush , luxuriant depths with tremendous speed . near evening it approached the falkland islands , whose rugged summits i recognized the next day . the sea was of moderate depth . so not without good reason , i assumed that these two islands , plus the many islets surrounding them , used to be part of the magellan coastline . the falkland islands were probably discovered by the famous navigator john davis , who gave them the name davis southern islands . later sir richard hawkins called them the maidenland , after the blessed virgin . subsequently , at the beginning of the 18th century , they were named the malouines by fishermen from saint - malo in brittany , then finally dubbed the falklands by the english , to whom they belong today .
i likewise marveled at the numerous medusas , including the most beautiful of their breed , the compass jellyfish , unique to the falkland seas . some of these jellyfish were shaped like very smooth , semispheric parasols with russet stripes and fringes of twelve neat festoons . others looked like upside - down baskets from which wide leaves and long red twigs were gracefully trailing . they swam with quiverings of their four leaflike arms , letting the opulent tresses of their tentacles dangle in the drift . i wanted to preserve a few specimens of these delicate zoophytes , but they were merely clouds , shadows , illusions , melting and evaporating outside their native element .
we did n't leave these patagonian waterways until april 3 , sometimes cruising under the ocean , sometimes on its surface . the nautilus passed the wide estuary formed by the mouth of the rio de la plata , and on april 4 we lay abreast of uruguay , albeit fifty miles out . keeping to its northerly heading , it followed the long windings of south america . by then we had fared 16,000 leagues since coming on board in the seas of japan .
we cut the equator . twenty miles to the west lay guiana , french territory where we could easily have taken refuge . but the wind was blowing a strong gust , and the furious billows would not allow us to face them in a mere skiff . no doubt ned land understood this because he said nothing to me . for my part , i made no allusion to his escape plans because i did n't want to push him into an attempt that was certain to misfire .
i was readily compensated for this delay by fascinating research . during those two days of april 11 - 12 , the nautilus did n't leave the surface of the sea , and its trawl brought up a simply miraculous catch of zoophytes , fish , and reptiles .
this " et cetera " wo n't keep me from mentioning one more fish that conseil , with good reason , will long remember .
the canadian and i sat him up ; we massaged his contracted arms , and when he regained his five senses , that eternal classifier mumbled in a broken voice :
" class of cartilaginous fish , order chondropterygia with fixed gills , suborder selacia , family rajiiforma , genus electric ray . "
" yes , my friend , " i answered , " it was an electric ray that put you in this deplorable state . "
" oh , master can trust me on this , " conseil shot back . " i 'll be revenged on that animal ! "
" how ? "
" i 'll eat it . "
which he did that same evening , but strictly as retaliation . because , frankly , it tasted like leather .
poor conseil had assaulted an electric ray of the most dangerous species , the cumana . living in a conducting medium such as water , this bizarre animal can electrocute other fish from several meters away , so great is the power of its electric organ , an organ whose two chief surfaces measure at least twenty - seven square feet .
" and do you know , " i added , " what happened since man has almost completely wiped out these beneficial races ? rotting weeds have poisoned the air , and this poisoned air causes the yellow fever that devastates these wonderful countries . this toxic vegetation has increased beneath the seas of the torrid zone , so the disease spreads unchecked from the mouth of the rio de la plata to florida ! "
and if professor toussenel is correct , this plague is nothing compared to the scourge that will strike our descendants once the seas are depopulated of whales and seals . by then , crowded with jellyfish , squid , and other devilfish , the oceans will have become huge centers of infection , because their waves will no longer possess " these huge stomachs that god has entrusted with scouring the surface of the sea . "
meanwhile , without scorning these theories , the nautilus 's crew captured half a dozen manatees . in essence , it was an issue of stocking the larder with excellent red meat , even better than beef or veal . their hunting was not a fascinating sport . the manatees let themselves be struck down without offering any resistance . several thousand kilos of meat were hauled below , to be dried and stored .
the same day an odd fishing practice further increased the nautilus 's stores , so full of game were these seas . our trawl brought up in its meshes a number of fish whose heads were topped by little oval slabs with fleshy edges . these were suckerfish from the third family of the subbrachian malacopterygia . these flat disks on their heads consist of crosswise plates of movable cartilage , between which the animals can create a vacuum , enabling them to stick to objects like suction cups .
the remoras i had observed in the mediterranean were related to this species . but the creature at issue here was an echeneis osteochara , unique to this sea . right after catching them , our seamen dropped them in buckets of water .
its fishing finished , the nautilus drew nearer to the coast . in this locality a number of sea turtles were sleeping on the surface of the waves . it would have been difficult to capture these valuable reptiles , because they wake up at the slightest sound , and their solid carapaces are harpoon - proof . but our suckerfish would effect their capture with extraordinary certainty and precision . in truth , this animal is a living fishhook , promising wealth and happiness to the greenest fisherman in the business .
the nautilus 's men attached to each fish 's tail a ring that was big enough not to hamper its movements , and to this ring a long rope whose other end was moored on board .
thrown into the sea , the suckerfish immediately began to play their roles , going and fastening themselves onto the breastplates of the turtles . their tenacity was so great , they would rip apart rather than let go . they were hauled in , still sticking to the turtles that came aboard with them .
in this way we caught several loggerheads , reptiles a meter wide and weighing 200 kilos . they 're extremely valuable because of their carapaces , which are covered with big slabs of horn , thin , brown , transparent , with white and yellow markings . besides , they were excellent from an edible viewpoint , with an exquisite flavor comparable to the green turtle .
this fishing ended our stay in the waterways of the amazon , and that evening the nautilus took to the high seas once more .
chapter 18
the devilfish
on april 16 we raised martinique and guadalupe from a distance of about thirty miles . for one instant i could see their lofty peaks .
the canadian was quite disheartened , having counted on putting his plans into execution in the gulf , either by reaching shore or by pulling alongside one of the many boats plying a coastal trade from one island to another . an escape attempt would have been quite feasible , assuming ned land managed to seize the skiff without the captain 's knowledge . but in midocean it was unthinkable .
what changes had come over him ? from what cause ? i had no reason to blame myself . was our presence on board perhaps a burden to him ? even so , i cherished no hopes that the man would set us free .
so i begged ned to let me think about it before taking action . if this measure proved fruitless , it could arouse the captain 's suspicions , make our circumstances even more arduous , and jeopardize the canadian 's plans . i might add that i could hardly use our state of health as an argument . except for that grueling ordeal under the ice bank at the south pole , we had never felt better , neither ned , conseil , nor i. the nutritious food , life - giving air , regular routine , and uniform temperature kept illness at bay ; and for a man who did n't miss his past existence on land , for a captain nemo who was at home here , who went where he wished , who took paths mysterious to others if not himself in attaining his ends , i could understand such a life . but we ourselves had n't severed all ties with humanity . for my part , i did n't want my new and unusual research to be buried with my bones . i had now earned the right to pen the definitive book on the sea , and sooner or later i wanted that book to see the light of day .
by april 20 we had risen to an average level of 1,500 meters . the nearest land was the island group of the bahamas , scattered like a batch of cobblestones over the surface of the water . there high underwater cliffs reared up , straight walls made of craggy chunks arranged like big stone foundations , among which there gaped black caves so deep our electric rays could n't light them to the far ends .
these rocks were hung with huge weeds , immense sea tangle , gigantic fucus-- a genuine trellis of water plants fit for a world of giants .
" well , " i said , " these are real devilfish caverns , and i would n't be surprised to see some of those monsters hereabouts . "
" what ! " conseil put in . " squid , ordinary squid from the class cephalopoda ? "
" no , " i said , " devilfish of large dimensions . but friend land is no doubt mistaken , because i do n't see a thing . "
" that 's regrettable , " conseil answered . " i 'd like to come face to face with one of those devilfish i 've heard so much about , which can drag ships down into the depths . those beasts go by the name of krake-- "
" fake is more like it , " the canadian replied sarcastically .
" krakens ! " conseil shot back , finishing his word without wincing at his companion 's witticism .
" nobody will ever make me believe , " ned land said , " that such animals exist . "
" why not ? " conseil replied . " we sincerely believed in master 's narwhale . "
" we were wrong , conseil . "
" no doubt , but there are others with no doubts who believe to this day ! "
" probably , conseil . but as for me , i 'm bound and determined not to accept the existence of any such monster till i 've dissected it with my own two hands . "
" yet , " conseil asked me , " does n't master believe in gigantic devilfish ? "
" yikes ! who in hades ever believed in them ? " the canadian exclaimed .
" many people , ned my friend , " i said .
" no fishermen . scientists maybe ! "
" pardon me , ned . fishermen and scientists ! "
" why , i to whom you speak , " conseil said with the world 's straightest face , " i recall perfectly seeing a large boat dragged under the waves by the arms of a cephalopod . "
" you saw that ? " the canadian asked .
" yes , ned . "
" with your own two eyes ? "
" with my own two eyes . "
" where , may i ask ? "
" in saint - malo , " conseil returned unflappably .
" in the harbor ? " ned land said sarcastically .
" no , in a church , " conseil replied .
" in a church ! " the canadian exclaimed .
" yes , ned my friend . it had a picture that portrayed the devilfish in question . "
" oh good ! " ned land exclaimed with a burst of laughter . " mr . conseil put one over on me ! "
" actually he 's right , " i said . " i 've heard about that picture . but the subject it portrays is taken from a legend , and you know how to rate legends in matters of natural history ! besides , when it 's an issue of monsters , the human imagination always tends to run wild . people not only claimed these devilfish could drag ships under , but a certain olaus magnus tells of a cephalopod a mile long that looked more like an island than an animal . there 's also the story of how the bishop of trondheim set up an altar one day on an immense rock . after he finished saying mass , this rock started moving and went back into the sea . the rock was a devilfish . "
" and that 's everything we know ? " the canadian asked .
" no , " i replied , " another bishop , pontoppidan of bergen , also tells of a devilfish so large a whole cavalry regiment could maneuver on it . "
" they sure did go on , those oldtime bishops ! " ned land said .
" finally , the naturalists of antiquity mention some monsters with mouths as big as a gulf , which were too huge to get through the strait of gibraltar . "
" good work , men ! " the canadian put in .
" but in all these stories , is there any truth ? " conseil asked .
" none at all , my friends , at least in those that go beyond the bounds of credibility and fly off into fable or legend . yet for the imaginings of these storytellers there had to be , if not a cause , at least an excuse . it ca n't be denied that some species of squid and other devilfish are quite large , though still smaller than cetaceans . aristotle put the dimensions of one squid at five cubits , or 3.1 meters . our fishermen frequently see specimens over 1.8 meters long . the museums in trieste and montpellier have preserved some devilfish carcasses measuring two meters . besides , according to the calculations of naturalists , one of these animals only six feet long would have tentacles as long as twenty - seven . which is enough to make a fearsome monster . "
" does anybody fish for 'em nowadays ? " the canadian asked .
" if they do n't fish for them , sailors at least sight them . a friend of mine , captain paul bos of le havre , has often sworn to me that he encountered one of these monsters of colossal size in the seas of the east indies . but the most astonishing event , which proves that these gigantic animals undeniably exist , took place a few years ago in 1861 . "
" what event was that ? " ned land asked .
" just this . in 1861 , to the northeast of tenerife and fairly near the latitude where we are right now , the crew of the gunboat alecto spotted a monstrous squid swimming in their waters . commander bouguer approached the animal and attacked it with blows from harpoons and blasts from rifles , but without much success because bullets and harpoons crossed its soft flesh as if it were semiliquid jelly . after several fruitless attempts , the crew managed to slip a noose around the mollusk 's body . this noose slid as far as the caudal fins and came to a halt . then they tried to haul the monster on board , but its weight was so considerable that when they tugged on the rope , the animal parted company with its tail ; and deprived of this adornment , it disappeared beneath the waters . "
" finally , an actual event , " ned land said .
" an indisputable event , my gallant ned . accordingly , people have proposed naming this devilfish bouguer 's squid . "
" and how long was it ? " the canadian asked .
" did n't it measure about six meters ? " said conseil , who was stationed at the window and examining anew the crevices in the cliff .
" precisely , " i replied .
" was n't its head , " conseil went on , " crowned by eight tentacles that quivered in the water like a nest of snakes ? "
" precisely . "
" were n't its eyes prominently placed and considerably enlarged ? "
" yes , conseil . "
" and was n't its mouth a real parrot 's beak but of fearsome size ? "
" correct , conseil . "
" well , with all due respect to master , " conseil replied serenely , " if this is n't bouguer 's squid , it 's at least one of his close relatives ! "
i stared at conseil . ned land rushed to the window .
" what an awful animal ! " he exclaimed .
i stared in my turn and could n't keep back a movement of revulsion . before my eyes there quivered a horrible monster worthy of a place among the most farfetched teratological legends .
it was a squid of colossal dimensions , fully eight meters long . it was traveling backward with tremendous speed in the same direction as the nautilus . it gazed with enormous , staring eyes that were tinted sea green . its eight arms ( or more accurately , feet ) were rooted in its head , which has earned these animals the name cephalopod ; its arms stretched a distance twice the length of its body and were writhing like the serpentine hair of the furies . you could plainly see its 250 suckers , arranged over the inner sides of its tentacles and shaped like semispheric capsules . sometimes these suckers fastened onto the lounge window by creating vacuums against it . the monster 's mouth -- a beak made of horn and shaped like that of a parrot -- opened and closed vertically . its tongue , also of horn substance and armed with several rows of sharp teeth , would flicker out from between these genuine shears . what a freak of nature ! a bird 's beak on a mollusk ! its body was spindle - shaped and swollen in the middle , a fleshy mass that must have weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilograms . its unstable color would change with tremendous speed as the animal grew irritated , passing successively from bluish gray to reddish brown .
what was irritating this mollusk ? no doubt the presence of the nautilus , even more fearsome than itself , and which it could n't grip with its mandibles or the suckers on its arms . and yet what monsters these devilfish are , what vitality our creator has given them , what vigor in their movements , thanks to their owning a triple heart !
" perhaps this is the same as the alecto 's , " conseil said .
" ca n't be , " the canadian replied , " because this one 's complete while the other one lost its tail ! "
" that does n't necessarily follow , " i said . " the arms and tails of these animals grow back through regeneration , and in seven years the tail on bouguer 's squid has surely had time to sprout again . "
" anyhow , " ned shot back , " if it is n't this fellow , maybe it 's one of those ! "
i continued sketching . these monsters kept pace in our waters with such precision , they seemed to be standing still , and i could have traced their outlines in miniature on the window . but we were moving at a moderate speed .
all at once the nautilus stopped . a jolt made it tremble through its entire framework .
" did we strike bottom ? " i asked .
" in any event we 're already clear , " the canadian replied , " because we 're afloat . "
the nautilus was certainly afloat , but it was no longer in motion . the blades of its propeller were n't churning the waves . a minute passed . followed by his chief officer , captain nemo entered the lounge .
i went over to the captain . " an unusual assortment of devilfish , " i told him , as carefree as a collector in front of an aquarium .
" correct , mr . naturalist , " he answered me , " and we 're going to fight them at close quarters . "
i gaped at the captain . i thought my hearing had gone bad .
" at close quarters ? " i repeated .
" yes , sir . our propeller is jammed . i think the horn - covered mandibles of one of these squid are entangled in the blades . that 's why we are n't moving . "
" and what are you going to do ? "
" rise to the surface and slaughter the vermin . "
" a difficult undertaking . "
" correct . our electric bullets are ineffective against such soft flesh , where they do n't meet enough resistance to go off . but we 'll attack the beasts with axes . "
" and harpoons , sir , " the canadian said , " if you do n't turn down my help . "
" i accept it , mr . land . "
" we 'll go with you , " i said . and we followed captain nemo , heading to the central companionway .
there some ten men were standing by for the assault , armed with boarding axes . conseil and i picked up two more axes . ned land seized a harpoon .
by then the nautilus had returned to the surface of the waves . stationed on the top steps , one of the seamen undid the bolts of the hatch . but he had scarcely unscrewed the nuts when the hatch flew up with tremendous violence , obviously pulled open by the suckers on a devilfish 's arm .
instantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the opening , and twenty others were quivering above . with a sweep of the ax , captain nemo chopped off this fearsome tentacle , which slid writhing down the steps .
just as we were crowding each other to reach the platform , two more arms lashed the air , swooped on the seaman stationed in front of captain nemo , and carried the fellow away with irresistible violence . captain nemo gave a shout and leaped outside . we rushed after him .
the poor fellow was done for . who could tear him from such a powerful grip ? even so , captain nemo rushed at the devilfish and with a sweep of the ax hewed one more of its arms . his chief officer struggled furiously with other monsters crawling up the nautilus 's sides . the crew battled with flailing axes . the canadian , conseil , and i sank our weapons into these fleshy masses . an intense , musky odor filled the air . it was horrible .
what rage then drove us against these monsters ! we lost all self - control . ten or twelve devilfish had overrun the nautilus 's platform and sides . we piled helter - skelter into the thick of these sawed - off snakes , which darted over the platform amid waves of blood and sepia ink . it seemed as if these viscous tentacles grew back like the many heads of hydra . at every thrust ned land 's harpoon would plunge into a squid 's sea - green eye and burst it . but my daring companion was suddenly toppled by the tentacles of a monster he could not avoid .
oh , my heart nearly exploded with excitement and horror ! the squid 's fearsome beak was wide open over ned land . the poor man was about to be cut in half . i ran to his rescue . but captain nemo got there first . his ax disappeared between the two enormous mandibles , and the canadian , miraculously saved , stood and plunged his harpoon all the way into the devilfish 's triple heart .
" tit for tat , " captain nemo told the canadian . " i owed it to myself ! " ned bowed without answering him .
this struggle had lasted a quarter of an hour . defeated , mutilated , battered to death , the monsters finally yielded to us and disappeared beneath the waves .
red with blood , motionless by the beacon , captain nemo stared at the sea that had swallowed one of his companions , and large tears streamed from his eyes .
chapter 19
the gulf stream
this dreadful scene on april 20 none of us will ever be able to forget . i wrote it up in a state of intense excitement . later i reviewed my narrative . i read it to conseil and the canadian . they found it accurate in detail but deficient in impact . to convey such sights , it would take the pen of our most famous poet , victor hugo , author of the toilers of the sea .
as i said , captain nemo wept while staring at the waves . his grief was immense . this was the second companion he had lost since we had come aboard . and what a way to die ! smashed , strangled , crushed by the fearsome arms of a devilfish , ground between its iron mandibles , this friend would never rest with his companions in the placid waters of their coral cemetery !
as for me , what had harrowed my heart in the thick of this struggle was the despairing yell given by this unfortunate man . forgetting his regulation language , this poor frenchman had reverted to speaking his own mother tongue to fling out one supreme plea ! among the nautilus 's crew , allied body and soul with captain nemo and likewise fleeing from human contact , i had found a fellow countryman ! was he the only representative of france in this mysterious alliance , obviously made up of individuals from different nationalities ? this was just one more of those insoluble problems that kept welling up in my mind !
captain nemo reentered his stateroom , and i saw no more of him for a good while . but how sad , despairing , and irresolute he must have felt , to judge from this ship whose soul he was , which reflected his every mood ! the nautilus no longer kept to a fixed heading . it drifted back and forth , riding with the waves like a corpse . its propeller had been disentangled but was barely put to use . it was navigating at random . it could n't tear itself away from the setting of this last struggle , from this sea that had devoured one of its own !
ten days went by in this way . it was only on may 1 that the nautilus openly resumed its northbound course , after raising the bahamas at the mouth of old bahama channel . we then went with the current of the sea 's greatest river , which has its own banks , fish , and temperature . i mean the gulf stream .
it is indeed a river that runs independently through the middle of the atlantic , its waters never mixing with the ocean 's waters . it 's a salty river , saltier than the sea surrounding it . its average depth is 3,000 feet , its average width sixty miles . in certain localities its current moves at a speed of four kilometers per hour . the unchanging volume of its waters is greater than that of all the world 's rivers combined .
near noon i was on the platform with conseil . i shared with him the relevant details on the gulf stream . when my explanation was over , i invited him to dip his hands into its current .
conseil did so , and he was quite astonished to experience no sensation of either hot or cold .
" that comes , " i told him , " from the water temperature of the gulf stream , which , as it leaves the gulf of mexico , is barely different from your blood temperature . this gulf stream is a huge heat generator that enables the coasts of europe to be decked in eternal greenery . and if commander maury is correct , were one to harness the full warmth of this current , it would supply enough heat to keep molten a river of iron solder as big as the amazon or the missouri . "
just then the gulf stream 's speed was 2.25 meters per second . so distinct is its current from the surrounding sea , its confined waters stand out against the ocean and operate on a different level from the colder waters . murky as well , and very rich in saline material , their pure indigo contrasts with the green waves surrounding them . moreover , their line of demarcation is so clear that abreast of the carolinas , the nautilus 's spur cut the waves of the gulf stream while its propeller was still churning those belonging to the ocean .
this current swept along with it a whole host of moving creatures . argonauts , so common in the mediterranean , voyaged here in schools of large numbers . among cartilaginous fish , the most remarkable were rays whose ultra slender tails made up nearly a third of the body , which was shaped like a huge diamond twenty - five feet long ; then little one - meter sharks , the head large , the snout short and rounded , the teeth sharp and arranged in several rows , the body seemingly covered with scales .
i might add that during the night , the gulf stream 's phosphorescent waters rivaled the electric glow of our beacon , especially in the stormy weather that frequently threatened us .
" what can we do , ned , since it is n't feasible to escape right now ? "
" i keep coming back to my idea . we 've got to talk to the captain . when we were in your own country 's seas , you did n't say a word . now that we 're in mine , i intend to speak up . before a few days are out , i figure the nautilus will lie abreast of nova scotia , and from there to newfoundland is the mouth of a large gulf , and the st . lawrence empties into that gulf , and the st . lawrence is my own river , the river running by quebec , my hometown-- and when i think about all this , my gorge rises and my hair stands on end ! honestly , sir , i 'd rather jump overboard ! i ca n't stay here any longer ! i 'm suffocating ! "
" well , sir ? " ned land went on , seeing that i had n't replied .
" well , ned , you want me to ask captain nemo what he intends to do with us ? "
" yes , sir . "
" even though he has already made that clear ? "
" yes . i want it settled once and for all . speak just for me , strictly on my behalf , if you want . "
" but i rarely encounter him . he positively avoids me . "
" all the more reason you should go look him up . "
" i 'll confer with him , ned . "
" when ? " the canadian asked insistently .
" when i encounter him . "
" professor aronnax , would you like me to go find him myself ? "
" no , let me do it . tomorrow-- "
" today , " ned land said .
" so be it . i 'll see him today , " i answered the canadian , who , if he took action himself , would certainly have ruined everything .
i was left to myself . his request granted , i decided to dispose of it immediately . i like things over and done with .
i reentered my stateroom . from there i could hear movements inside captain nemo 's quarters . i could n't pass up this chance for an encounter . i knocked on his door . i received no reply . i knocked again , then tried the knob . the door opened .
i entered . the captain was there . he was bending over his worktable and had n't heard me . determined not to leave without questioning him , i drew closer . he looked up sharply , with a frowning brow , and said in a pretty stern tone :
" oh , it 's you ! what do you want ? "
" to speak with you , captain . "
" but i 'm busy , sir , i 'm at work . i give you the freedom to enjoy your privacy , ca n't i have the same for myself ? "
this reception was less than encouraging . but i was determined to give as good as i got .
" sir , " i said coolly , " i need to speak with you on a matter that simply ca n't wait . "
" whatever could that be , sir ? " he replied sarcastically . " have you made some discovery that has escaped me ? has the sea yielded up some novel secret to you ? "
we were miles apart . but before i could reply , he showed me a manuscript open on the table and told me in a more serious tone :
" here , professor aronnax , is a manuscript written in several languages . it contains a summary of my research under the sea , and god willing , it wo n't perish with me . signed with my name , complete with my life story , this manuscript will be enclosed in a small , unsinkable contrivance . the last surviving man on the nautilus will throw this contrivance into the sea , and it will go wherever the waves carry it . "
the man 's name ! his life story written by himself ! so the secret of his existence might someday be unveiled ? but just then i saw this announcement only as a lead - in to my topic .
" captain , " i replied , " i 'm all praise for this idea you 're putting into effect . the fruits of your research must not be lost . but the methods you 're using strike me as primitive . who knows where the winds will take that contrivance , into whose hands it may fall ? ca n't you find something better ? ca n't you or one of your men-- "
" never , sir , " the captain said , swiftly interrupting me .
" but my companions and i would be willing to safeguard this manuscript , and if you give us back our freedom-- "
" your freedom ! " captain nemo put in , standing up .
" yes , sir , and that 's the subject on which i wanted to confer with you . for seven months we 've been aboard your vessel , and i ask you today , in the name of my companions as well as myself , if you intend to keep us here forever . "
" what you 're inflicting on us is outright slavery ! "
" call it anything you like . "
" who has denied you that right ? " captain nemo replied . " did i ever try to bind you with your word of honor ? " the captain stared at me , crossing his arms .
i withdrew . from that day forward our position was very strained . i reported this conversation to my two companions .
" now we know , " ned said , " that we ca n't expect a thing from this man . the nautilus is nearing long island . we 'll escape , no matter what the weather . "
the storm burst during the daytime of may 13 , just as the nautilus was cruising abreast of long island , a few miles from the narrows to upper new york bay . i 'm able to describe this struggle of the elements because captain nemo did n't flee into the ocean depths ; instead , from some inexplicable whim , he decided to brave it out on the surface .
the wind was blowing from the southwest , initially a stiff breeze , in other words , with a speed of fifteen meters per second , which built to twenty - five meters near three o'clock in the afternoon . this is the figure for major storms .
unshaken by these squalls , captain nemo stationed himself on the platform . he was lashed around the waist to withstand the monstrous breakers foaming over the deck . i hoisted and attached myself to the same place , dividing my wonderment between the storm and this incomparable man who faced it head - on .
after nightfall the storm grew in intensity . as in the 1860 cyclone on runion island , the barometer fell to 710 millimeters . at the close of day , i saw a big ship passing on the horizon , struggling painfully . it lay to at half steam in an effort to hold steady on the waves . it must have been a steamer on one of those lines out of new york to liverpool or le havre . it soon vanished into the shadows .
oh , that gulf stream ! it truly lives up to its nickname , the lord of storms ! all by itself it creates these fearsome cyclones through the difference in temperature between its currents and the superimposed layers of air .
captain nemo reentered near midnight . i could hear the ballast tanks filling little by little , and the nautilus sank gently beneath the surface of the waves .
through the lounge 's open windows , i saw large , frightened fish passing like phantoms in the fiery waters . some were struck by lightning right before my eyes !
the nautilus kept descending . i thought it would find calm again at fifteen meters down . no . the upper strata were too violently agitated . it needed to sink to fifty meters , searching for a resting place in the bowels of the sea .
chapter 20
in latitude 47 degrees 24 ' and longitude 17 degrees 28 '
in the aftermath of this storm , we were thrown back to the east . away went any hope of escaping to the landing places of new york or the st . lawrence . in despair , poor ned went into seclusion like captain nemo . conseil and i no longer left each other .
as i said , the nautilus veered to the east . to be more accurate , i should have said to the northeast . sometimes on the surface of the waves , sometimes beneath them , the ship wandered for days amid these mists so feared by navigators . these are caused chiefly by melting ice , which keeps the air extremely damp . how many ships have perished in these waterways as they tried to get directions from the hazy lights on the coast ! how many casualties have been caused by these opaque mists ! how many collisions have occurred with these reefs , where the breaking surf is covered by the noise of the wind ! how many vessels have rammed each other , despite their running lights , despite the warnings given by their bosun 's pipes and alarm bells !
the sea is of no great depth at the grand banks . a few hundred fathoms at best . but to the south there is a deep , suddenly occurring depression , a 3,000-meter pit . here the gulf stream widens . its waters come to full bloom . it loses its speed and temperature , but it turns into a sea .
among the fish that the nautilus startled on its way , i 'll mention a one - meter lumpfish , blackish on top with orange on the belly and rare among its brethren in that it practices monogamy , a good - sized eelpout , a type of emerald moray whose flavor is excellent , wolffish with big eyes in a head somewhat resembling a canine 's , viviparous blennies whose eggs hatch inside their bodies like those of snakes , bloated gobio ( or black gudgeon ) measuring two decimeters , grenadiers with long tails and gleaming with a silvery glow , speedy fish venturing far from their high arctic seas .
and i 'll mention -- for the record -- some little banded blennies that follow ships into the northernmost seas , sharp - snouted carp exclusive to the north atlantic , scorpionfish , and lastly the gadoid family , chiefly the cod species , which i detected in their waters of choice over these inexhaustible grand banks .
because newfoundland is simply an underwater peak , you could call these cod mountain fish . while the nautilus was clearing a path through their tight ranks , conseil could n't refrain from making this comment :
" mercy , look at these cod ! " he said . " why , i thought cod were flat , like dab or sole ! "
" innocent boy ! " i exclaimed . " cod are flat only at the grocery store , where they 're cut open and spread out on display . but in the water they 're like mullet , spindle - shaped and perfectly built for speed . "
" i can easily believe master , " conseil replied . " but what crowds of them ! what swarms ! "
" bah ! my friend , there 'd be many more without their enemies , scorpionfish and human beings ! do you know how many eggs have been counted in a single female ? "
" i 'll go all out , " conseil replied . " 500,000 . "
" 11,000,000 , my friend . "
" 11,000,000 ! i refuse to accept that until i count them myself . "
" fine , " conseil replied , " i 'll take master 's word for it . i wo n't count them . "
" count what ? "
" those 11,000,000 eggs . but i 'll make one comment . "
" what 's that ? "
instead of continuing north , the nautilus took an easterly heading , as if to go along this plateau on which the telegraph cable rests , where multiple soundings have given the contours of the terrain with the utmost accuracy .
these americans refused to give up . the daring cyrus field , who had risked his whole fortune to promote this undertaking , called for a new bond issue . it sold out immediately . another cable was put down under better conditions . its sheaves of conducting wire were insulated within a gutta - percha covering , which was protected by a padding of textile material enclosed in a metal sheath . the great eastern put back to sea on july 13 , 1866 .
the operation proceeded apace . yet there was one hitch . as they gradually unrolled this third cable , the electricians observed on several occasions that someone had recently driven nails into it , trying to damage its core . captain anderson , his officers , and the engineers put their heads together , then posted a warning that if the culprit were detected , he would be thrown overboard without a trial . after that , these villainous attempts were not repeated .
by july 23 the great eastern was lying no farther than 800 kilometers from newfoundland when it received telegraphed news from ireland of an armistice signed between prussia and austria after the battle of sadova . through the mists on the 27th , it sighted the port of heart 's content . the undertaking had ended happily , and in its first dispatch , young america addressed old europe with these wise words so rarely understood : " glory to god in the highest , and peace on earth to men of good will . "
there the ocean floor formed a valley 120 kilometers wide , into which you could fit mt . blanc without its summit poking above the surface of the waves . this valley is closed off to the east by a sheer wall 2,000 meters high . we arrived there on may 28 , and the nautilus lay no farther than 150 kilometers from ireland . would captain nemo head up north and beach us on the british isles ? no . much to my surprise , he went back down south and returned to european seas . as we swung around the emerald isle , i spotted cape clear for an instant , plus the lighthouse on fastnet rock that guides all those thousands of ships setting out from glasgow or liverpool .
an important question then popped into my head . would the nautilus dare to tackle the english channel ? ned land ( who promptly reappeared after we hugged shore ) never stopped questioning me . what could i answer him ? captain nemo remained invisible . after giving the canadian a glimpse of american shores , was he about to show me the coast of france ?
but the nautilus kept gravitating southward . on may 30 , in sight of land 's end , it passed between the lowermost tip of england and the scilly islands , which it left behind to starboard .
if it was going to enter the english channel , it clearly needed to head east . it did not .
the next day , june 1 , the nautilus kept to the same tack . it was obviously trying to locate some precise spot in the ocean . just as on the day before , captain nemo came to take the altitude of the sun . the sea was smooth , the skies clear . eight miles to the east , a big steamship was visible on the horizon line . no flag was flapping from the gaff of its fore - and - aft sail , and i could n't tell its nationality .
a few minutes before the sun passed its zenith , captain nemo raised his sextant and took his sights with the utmost precision . the absolute calm of the waves facilitated this operation . the nautilus lay motionless , neither rolling nor pitching .
i was on the platform just then . after determining our position , the captain pronounced only these words :
" it 's right here ! "
he went down the hatch . had he seen that vessel change course and seemingly head toward us ? i 'm unable to say .
i returned to the lounge . the hatch closed , and i heard water hissing in the ballast tanks . the nautilus began to sink on a vertical line , because its propeller was in check and no longer furnished any forward motion .
some minutes later it stopped at a depth of 833 meters and came to rest on the seafloor .
the ceiling lights in the lounge then went out , the panels opened , and through the windows i saw , for a half - mile radius , the sea brightly lit by the beacon 's rays .
i looked to port and saw nothing but the immenseness of these tranquil waters .
what ship was this ? why had the nautilus come to visit its grave ? was it something other than a maritime accident that had dragged this craft under the waters ?
i was n't sure what to think , but next to me i heard captain nemo 's voice slowly say :
" this is the avenger ! " i exclaimed .
chapter 21
a mass execution
did this hate also hunger for vengeance ? time would soon tell .
meanwhile the nautilus rose slowly to the surface of the sea , and i watched the avenger 's murky shape disappearing little by little . soon a gentle rolling told me that we were afloat in the open air .
just then a hollow explosion was audible . i looked at the captain . the captain did not stir .
" captain ? " i said .
he did n't reply .
i left him and climbed onto the platform . conseil and the canadian were already there .
" what caused that explosion ? " i asked .
" what sort of craft is it , ned ? "
" tell me , ned , " i asked , " can you make out the nationality of that craft ? "
creasing his brow , lowering his lids , and puckering the corners of his eyes , the canadian focused the full power of his gaze on the ship for a short while .
" no , sir , " he replied . " i ca n't make out what nation it 's from . it 's flying no flag . but i 'll swear it 's a warship , because there 's a long pennant streaming from the peak of its mainmast . "
for a quarter of an hour , we continued to watch the craft bearing down on us . but it was inconceivable to me that it had discovered the nautilus at such a distance , still less that it knew what this underwater machine really was .
soon the canadian announced that the craft was a big battleship , a double - decker ironclad complete with ram . dark , dense smoke burst from its two funnels . its furled sails merged with the lines of its yardarms . the gaff of its fore - and - aft sail flew no flag . its distance still kept us from distinguishing the colors of its pennant , which was fluttering like a thin ribbon .
it was coming on fast . if captain nemo let it approach , a chance for salvation might be available to us .
" sir , " ned land told me , " if that boat gets within a mile of us , i 'm jumping overboard , and i suggest you follow suit . "
i did n't reply to the canadian 's proposition but kept watching the ship , which was looming larger on the horizon . whether it was english , french , american , or russian , it would surely welcome us aboard if we could just get to it .
" master may recall , " conseil then said , " that we have some experience with swimming . he can rely on me to tow him to that vessel , if he 's agreeable to going with our friend ned . "
before i could reply , white smoke streamed from the battleship 's bow . then , a few seconds later , the waters splashed astern of the nautilus , disturbed by the fall of a heavy object . soon after , an explosion struck my ears .
" what 's this ? they 're firing at us ! " i exclaimed .
" good lads ! " the canadian muttered .
" that means they do n't see us as castaways clinging to some wreckage ! "
" with all due respect to master -- gracious ! " conseil put in , shaking off the water that had sprayed over him from another shell . " with all due respect to master , they 've discovered the narwhale and they 're cannonading the same . "
" but it must be clear to them , " i exclaimed , " that they 're dealing with human beings . "
" maybe that 's why ! " ned land replied , staring hard at me .
the full truth dawned on me . undoubtedly people now knew where they stood on the existence of this so - called monster . undoubtedly the latter 's encounter with the abraham lincoln , when the canadian hit it with his harpoon , had led commander farragut to recognize the narwhale as actually an underwater boat , more dangerous than any unearthly cetacean !
yes , this had to be the case , and undoubtedly they were now chasing this dreadful engine of destruction on every sea !
this whole fearsome sequence of events appeared in my mind 's eye . instead of encountering friends on this approaching ship , we would find only pitiless enemies .
meanwhile shells fell around us in increasing numbers . some , meeting the liquid surface , would ricochet and vanish into the sea at considerable distances . but none of them reached the nautilus .
by then the ironclad was no more than three miles off . despite its violent cannonade , captain nemo had n't appeared on the platform . and yet if one of those conical shells had scored a routine hit on the nautilus 's hull , it could have been fatal to him .
the canadian then told me : " sir , we 've got to do everything we can to get out of this jam ! let 's signal them ! damnation ! maybe they 'll realize we 're decent people ! "
ned land pulled out his handkerchief to wave it in the air . but he had barely unfolded it when he was felled by an iron fist , and despite his great strength , he tumbled to the deck .
" scum ! " the captain shouted . " do you want to be nailed to the nautilus 's spur before it charges that ship ? "
dreadful to hear , captain nemo was even more dreadful to see . his face was pale from some spasm of his heart , which must have stopped beating for an instant . his pupils were hideously contracted . his voice was no longer speaking , it was bellowing . bending from the waist , he shook the canadian by the shoulders .
then , dropping ned and turning to the battleship , whose shells were showering around him :
and in the bow of the platform , captain nemo unfurled a black flag , like the one he had left planted at the south pole .
just then a shell hit the nautilus 's hull obliquely , failed to breach it , ricocheted near the captain , and vanished into the sea .
captain nemo shrugged his shoulders . then , addressing me :
" go below ! " he told me in a curt tone . " you and your companions , go below ! "
" sir , " i exclaimed , " are you going to attack this ship ? "
" sir , i 'm going to sink it . "
" you would n't ! "
" i will , " captain nemo replied icily . " you 're ill - advised to pass judgment on me , sir . fate has shown you what you were n't meant to see . the attack has come . our reply will be dreadful . get back inside ! "
" from what country is that ship ? "
" you do n't know ? fine , so much the better ! at least its nationality will remain a secret to you . go below ! "
the canadian , conseil , and i could only obey . some fifteen of the nautilus 's seamen surrounded their captain and stared with a feeling of implacable hate at the ship bearing down on them . you could feel the same spirit of vengeance enkindling their every soul .
i went below just as another projectile scraped the nautilus 's hull , and i heard the captain exclaim :
i repaired to my stateroom . the captain and his chief officer stayed on the platform . the propeller was set in motion . the nautilus swiftly retreated , putting us outside the range of the vessel 's shells . but the chase continued , and captain nemo was content to keep his distance .
i tried to intervene one last time . but i had barely queried captain nemo when the latter silenced me :
i took a last look at the battleship , which was putting on steam . then i rejoined ned and conseil .
" we 'll escape ! " i exclaimed .
" good , " ned put in . " where 's that ship from ? "
" i 've no idea . but wherever it 's from , it will sink before nightfall . in any event , it 's better to perish with it than be accomplices in some act of revenge whose merits we ca n't gauge . "
" that 's my feeling , " ned land replied coolly . " let 's wait for nightfall . "
night fell . a profound silence reigned on board . the compass indicated that the nautilus had n't changed direction . i could hear the beat of its propeller , churning the waves with steady speed . staying on the surface of the water , it rolled gently , sometimes to one side , sometimes to the other .
at three o'clock in the morning , full of uneasiness , i climbed onto the platform . captain nemo had n't left it . he stood in the bow next to his flag , which a mild breeze was unfurling above his head . his eyes never left that vessel . the extraordinary intensity of his gaze seemed to attract it , beguile it , and draw it more surely than if he had it in tow !
and when i compared this deep calm of the elements with all the fury seething inside the plating of this barely perceptible nautilus , i shivered all over .
the vessel was two miles off . it drew nearer , always moving toward the phosphorescent glow that signaled the nautilus 's presence . i saw its green and red running lights , plus the white lantern hanging from the large stay of its foremast . hazy flickerings were reflected on its rigging and indicated that its furnaces were pushed to the limit . showers of sparks and cinders of flaming coal escaped from its funnels , spangling the air with stars .
i stood there until six o'clock in the morning , captain nemo never seeming to notice me . the vessel lay a mile and a half off , and with the first glimmers of daylight , it resumed its cannonade . the time could n't be far away when the nautilus would attack its adversary , and my companions and i would leave forever this man i dared not judge .
at seven o'clock the log told me that the nautilus had reduced speed . i realized that it was letting the warship approach . moreover , the explosions grew more intensely audible . shells furrowed the water around us , drilling through it with an odd hissing sound .
" my friends , " i said , " it 's time . let 's shake hands , and may god be with us ! "
ned land was determined , conseil calm , i myself nervous and barely in control .
we went into the library . just as i pushed open the door leading to the well of the central companionway , i heard the hatch close sharply overhead .
the canadian leaped up the steps , but i stopped him . a well - known hissing told me that water was entering the ship 's ballast tanks . indeed , in a few moments the nautilus had submerged some meters below the surface of the waves .
i understood this maneuver . it was too late to take action . the nautilus was n't going to strike the double - decker where it was clad in impenetrable iron armor , but below its waterline , where the metal carapace no longer protected its planking .
meanwhile the nautilus 's speed had increased appreciably . so it was gathering momentum . its entire hull was vibrating .
suddenly i let out a yell . there had been a collision , but it was comparatively mild . i could feel the penetrating force of the steel spur . i could hear scratchings and scrapings . carried away with its driving power , the nautilus had passed through the vessel 's mass like a sailmaker 's needle through canvas !
i could n't hold still . frantic , going insane , i leaped out of my stateroom and rushed into the lounge .
captain nemo was there . mute , gloomy , implacable , he was staring through the port panel .
an enormous mass was sinking beneath the waters , and the nautilus , missing none of its death throes , was descending into the depths with it . ten meters away , i could see its gaping hull , into which water was rushing with a sound of thunder , then its double rows of cannons and railings . its deck was covered with dark , quivering shadows .
the water was rising . those poor men leaped up into the shrouds , clung to the masts , writhed beneath the waters . it was a human anthill that an invading sea had caught by surprise !
paralyzed , rigid with anguish , my hair standing on end , my eyes popping out of my head , short of breath , suffocating , speechless , i stared-- i too ! i was glued to the window by an irresistible allure !
the enormous vessel settled slowly . following it down , the nautilus kept watch on its every movement . suddenly there was an eruption . the air compressed inside the craft sent its decks flying , as if the powder stores had been ignited . the thrust of the waters was so great , the nautilus swerved away .
the poor ship then sank more swiftly . its mastheads appeared , laden with victims , then its crosstrees bending under clusters of men , finally the peak of its mainmast . then the dark mass disappeared , and with it a crew of corpses dragged under by fearsome eddies . . . .
i turned to captain nemo . this dreadful executioner , this true archangel of hate , was still staring . when it was all over , captain nemo headed to the door of his stateroom , opened it , and entered . i followed him with my eyes .
on the rear paneling , beneath the portraits of his heroes , i saw the portrait of a still - youthful woman with two little children . captain nemo stared at them for a few moments , stretched out his arms to them , sank to his knees , and melted into sobs .
chapter 22
the last words of captain nemo
i reentered my stateroom , where ned and conseil were waiting silently . captain nemo filled me with insurmountable horror . whatever he had once suffered at the hands of humanity , he had no right to mete out such punishment . he had made me , if not an accomplice , at least an eyewitness to his vengeance ! even this was intolerable .
at eleven o'clock the electric lights came back on . i went into the lounge . it was deserted . i consulted the various instruments . the nautilus was fleeing northward at a speed of twenty - five miles per hour , sometimes on the surface of the sea , sometimes thirty feet beneath it .
by evening we had cleared 200 leagues up the atlantic . shadows gathered and gloom overran the sea until the moon came up .
i repaired to my stateroom . i could n't sleep . i was assaulted by nightmares . that horrible scene of destruction kept repeating in my mind 's eye .
from that day forward , who knows where the nautilus took us in the north atlantic basin ? always at incalculable speed ! always amid the high arctic mists ! did it call at the capes of spitzbergen or the shores of novaya zemlya ? did it visit such uncharted seas as the white sea , the kara sea , the gulf of ob , the lyakhov islands , or those unknown beaches on the siberian coast ? i 'm unable to say . i lost track of the passing hours . time was in abeyance on the ship 's clocks . as happens in the polar regions , it seemed that night and day no longer followed their normal sequence . i felt myself being drawn into that strange domain where the overwrought imagination of edgar allan poe was at home . like his fabled arthur gordon pym , i expected any moment to see that " shrouded human figure , very far larger in its proportions than any dweller among men , " thrown across the cataract that protects the outskirts of the pole !
i estimate -- but perhaps i 'm mistaken -- that the nautilus 's haphazard course continued for fifteen or twenty days , and i 'm not sure how long this would have gone on without the catastrophe that ended our voyage . as for captain nemo , he was no longer in the picture . as for his chief officer , the same applied . not one crewman was visible for a single instant . the nautilus cruised beneath the waters almost continuously . when it rose briefly to the surface to renew our air , the hatches opened and closed as if automated . no more positions were reported on the world map . i did n't know where we were .
i 'll also mention that the canadian , at the end of his strength and patience , made no further appearances . conseil could n't coax a single word out of him and feared that , in a fit of delirium while under the sway of a ghastly homesickness , ned would kill himself . so he kept a devoted watch on his friend every instant .
you can appreciate that under these conditions , our situation had become untenable .
" we 're going to escape ! "
i sat up . " when ? " i asked .
" tonight . there does n't seem to be any supervision left on the nautilus . you 'd think a total daze was reigning on board . will you be ready , sir ? "
" yes . where are we ? "
" in sight of land . i saw it through the mists just this morning , twenty miles to the east . "
" what land is it ? "
" i 've no idea , but whatever it is , there we 'll take refuge . "
" yes , ned ! we 'll escape tonight even if the sea swallows us up ! "
" i 'm with you . "
" then we 'll die together , ned my friend . "
how long that day seemed , the last i would spend aboard the nautilus ! i was left to myself . ned land and conseil avoided speaking to me , afraid they would give themselves away .
at six o'clock i ate supper , but i had no appetite . despite my revulsion , i forced it down , wanting to keep my strength up .
at 6:30 ned land entered my stateroom . he told me :
" we wo n't see each other again before we go . at ten o'clock the moon wo n't be up yet . we 'll take advantage of the darkness . come to the skiff . conseil and i will be inside waiting for you . "
the canadian left without giving me time to answer him .
i wanted to verify the nautilus 's heading . i made my way to the lounge . we were racing north - northeast with frightful speed , fifty meters down .
i took one last look at the natural wonders and artistic treasures amassed in the museum , this unrivaled collection doomed to perish someday in the depths of the seas , together with its curator . i wanted to establish one supreme impression in my mind . i stayed there an hour , basking in the aura of the ceiling lights , passing in review the treasures shining in their glass cases . then i returned to my stateroom . there i dressed in sturdy seafaring clothes . i gathered my notes and packed them tenderly about my person . my heart was pounding mightily . i could n't curb its pulsations . my anxiety and agitation would certainly have given me away if captain nemo had seen me .
what was he doing just then ? i listened at the door to his stateroom . i heard the sound of footsteps . captain nemo was inside . he had n't gone to bed . with his every movement i imagined he would appear and ask me why i wanted to escape ! i felt in a perpetual state of alarm . my imagination magnified this sensation . the feeling became so acute , i wondered whether it would n't be better to enter the captain 's stateroom , dare him face to face , brave it out with word and deed !
by then it was 9:30 . i held my head in both hands to keep it from bursting . i closed my eyes . i no longer wanted to think . a half hour still to wait ! a half hour of nightmares that could drive me insane !
just then i heard indistinct chords from the organ , melancholy harmonies from some undefinable hymn , actual pleadings from a soul trying to sever its earthly ties . i listened with all my senses at once , barely breathing , immersed like captain nemo in this musical trance that was drawing him beyond the bounds of this world .
then a sudden thought terrified me . captain nemo had left his stateroom . he was in the same lounge i had to cross in order to escape . there i would encounter him one last time . he would see me , perhaps speak to me ! one gesture from him could obliterate me , a single word shackle me to his vessel !
even so , ten o'clock was about to strike . it was time to leave my stateroom and rejoin my companions . i dared not hesitate , even if captain nemo stood before me . i opened the door cautiously , but as it swung on its hinges , it seemed to make a frightful noise . this noise existed , perhaps , only in my imagination !
i crept forward through the nautilus 's dark gangways , pausing after each step to curb the pounding of my heart . i arrived at the corner door of the lounge . i opened it gently . the lounge was plunged in profound darkness . chords from the organ were reverberating faintly . captain nemo was there . he did n't see me . even in broad daylight i doubt that he would have noticed me , so completely was he immersed in his trance .
i inched over the carpet , avoiding the tiniest bump whose noise might give me away . it took me five minutes to reach the door at the far end , which led into the library .
" o almighty god ! enough ! enough ! "
was it a vow of repentance that had just escaped from this man 's conscience . . . ?
frantic , i rushed into the library . i climbed the central companionway , and going along the upper gangway , i arrived at the skiff . i went through the opening that had already given access to my two companions .
" let 's go , let 's go ! " i exclaimed .
" right away ! " the canadian replied .
first , ned land closed and bolted the opening cut into the nautilus 's sheet iron , using the monkey wrench he had with him . after likewise closing the opening in the skiff , the canadian began to unscrew the nuts still bolting us to the underwater boat .
suddenly a noise from the ship 's interior became audible . voices were answering each other hurriedly . what was it ? had they spotted our escape ? i felt ned land sliding a dagger into my hand .
" yes , " i muttered , " we know how to die ! "
" maelstrom ! maelstrom ! " they were shouting .
the maelstrom ! could a more frightening name have rung in our ears under more frightening circumstances ? were we lying in the dangerous waterways off the norwegian coast ? was the nautilus being dragged into this whirlpool just as the skiff was about to detach from its plating ?
as you know , at the turn of the tide , the waters confined between the faroe and lofoten islands rush out with irresistible violence . they form a vortex from which no ship has ever been able to escape . monstrous waves race together from every point of the horizon . they form a whirlpool aptly called " the ocean 's navel , " whose attracting power extends a distance of fifteen kilometers . it can suck down not only ships but whales , and even polar bears from the northernmost regions .
what a predicament ! we were rocking frightfully . the nautilus defended itself like a human being . its steel muscles were cracking . sometimes it stood on end , the three of us along with it !
he had n't finished speaking when a cracking sound occurred . the nuts gave way , and ripped out of its socket , the skiff was hurled like a stone from a sling into the midst of the vortex .
my head struck against an iron timber , and with this violent shock i lost consciousness .
chapter 23
conclusion
we come to the conclusion of this voyage under the seas . what happened that night , how the skiff escaped from the maelstrom 's fearsome eddies , how ned land , conseil , and i got out of that whirlpool , i 'm unable to say . but when i regained consciousness , i was lying in a fisherman 's hut on one of the lofoten islands . my two companions , safe and sound , were at my bedside clasping my hands . we embraced each other heartily .
just now we ca n't even dream of returning to france . travel between upper norway and the south is limited . so i have to wait for the arrival of a steamboat that provides bimonthly service from north cape .
so it is here , among these gallant people who have taken us in , that i 'm reviewing my narrative of these adventures . it is accurate . not a fact has been omitted , not a detail has been exaggerated . it 's the faithful record of this inconceivable expedition into an element now beyond human reach , but where progress will someday make great inroads .
will anyone believe me ? i do n't know . ultimately it 's unimportant . what i can now assert is that i 've earned the right to speak of these seas , beneath which in less than ten months , i 've cleared 20,000 leagues in this underwater tour of the world that has shown me so many wonders across the pacific , the indian ocean , the red sea , the mediterranean , the atlantic , the southernmost and northernmost seas !
but what happened to the nautilus ? did it withstand the maelstrom 's clutches ? is captain nemo alive ? is he still under the ocean pursuing his frightful program of revenge , or did he stop after that latest mass execution ? will the waves someday deliver that manuscript that contains his full life story ? will i finally learn the man 's name ? will the nationality of the stricken warship tell us the nationality of captain nemo ?
